III

That man was so unashamed of his admirations and his surprises
at a nature full of startling events and impossible things.
How I wish I could take myself back, could bring you back, to
that innocent time when men were just beginning to disbelieve
in miracles and only starting to find still more miraculous facts.
How marvelous it would be to step into that simple Dutchman’s
shoes, to be inside his brain and body, to feel his excitement—it
is almost nausea!—at his first peep at those cavorting
“wretched beasties.”

That was what he called them, and, as I have told you, this
Leeuwenhoek was an unsure man. Those animals were too
tremendously small to be true, they were too strange to be
true. So he looked again, till his hands were cramped with
holding his microscope and his eyes full of that smarting water
that comes from too-long looking. But he was right! Here
they were again, not one kind of little creature, but here was
another, larger than the first, “moving about very nimbly because
they were furnished with divers incredibly thin feet.”
Wait! Here is a third kind—and a fourth, so tiny I can’t
make out his shape. But he is alive! He goes about, dashing
over great distances in this world of his water-drop in the little
tube.... What nimble creatures!

“They stop, they stand still as ’twere upon a point, and then
turn themselves round with that swiftness, as we see a top turn
round, the circumference they make being no bigger than that
of a fine grain of sand.” So wrote Leeuwenhoek.

For all this seemingly impractical sniffing about, Leeuwenhoek
was a hard-headed man. He hardly ever spun theories,
he was a fiend for measuring things. Only how could you make
a measuring stick for anything so small as these little beasts?
He wrinkled his low forehead: “How large really is this last
and smallest of the little beasts?” He poked about in the cobwebbed
corners of his memory among the thousand other things
he had studied with you can’t imagine what thoroughness; he
made calculations: “This last kind of animal is a thousand
times smaller than the eye of a large louse!” That was an
accurate man. For we know now that the eye of one full-grown
louse is no larger nor smaller than the eyes of ten thousand
of his brother and sister lice.

But where did these outlandish little inhabitants of the rainwater
come from? Had they come down from the sky? Had
they crawled invisibly over the side of the pot from the ground?
Or had they been created out of nothing by a God full of
whims? Leeuwenhoek believed in God as piously as any Seventeenth
Century Dutchman. He always referred to God as the
Maker of the Great All. He not only believed in God but he
admired him intensely—what a Being to know how to fashion
bees’ wings so prettily! But then Leeuwenhoek was a materialist
too. His good sense told him that life comes from life. His
simple belief told him that God had invented all living things
in six days, and, having set the machinery going, sat back to
reward good observers and punish guessers and bluffers. He
stopped speculating about improbable gentle rains of little
animals from heaven. Certainly God couldn’t brew those animals
in the rain water pot out of nothing! But wait....
Maybe? Well, there was only one way to find out where they
came from. “I will experiment!” he muttered.

He washed out a wine glass very clean, he dried it, he held
it under the spout of his eaves-trough, he took a wee drop in
one of his hair-fine tubes. Under his lens it went.... Yes!
They were there, a few of those beasts, swimming about....
“They are present even in very fresh rain water!” But then,
that really proved nothing, they might live in the eaves-trough
and be washed down by the water....

Then he took a big porcelain dish, “glazed blue within,” he
washed it clean, out into the rain he went with it and put it
on top of a big box so that the falling raindrops would splash
no mud into the dish. The first water he threw out to clean
it still more thoroughly. Then intently he collected the next
bit in one of his slender pipes, into his study he went with
it....

“I have proved it! This water has not a single little creature
in it! They do not come down from the sky!”

But he kept that water; hour after hour, day after day he
squinted at it—and on the fourth day he saw those wee beasts
beginning to appear in the water along with bits of dust and
little flecks of thread and lint. That was a man from Missouri!
Imagine a world of men who would submit all of their cocksure
judgments to the ordeal of the common-sense experiments
of a Leeuwenhoek!

Did he write to the Royal Society to tell them of this entirely
unsuspected world of life he had discovered? Not yet!
He was a slow man. He turned his lens onto all kinds of
water, water kept in the close air of his study, water in a pot
kept on the high roof of his house, water from the not-too-clean
canals of Delft and water from the deep cold well in his
garden. Everywhere he found those beasts. He gaped at
their enormous littleness, he found many thousands of them
did not equal a grain of sand in bigness, he compared them to
a cheese-mite and they were to this filthy little creature as a
bee is to a horse. He was never tired with watching them
“swim about among one another gently like a swarm of mosquitoes
in the air....”

Of course this man was a groper. He was a groper and a
stumbler as all men are gropers, devoid of prescience, and
stumblers, finding what they never set out to find. His new
beasties were marvelous but they were not enough for him, he
was always poking into everything, trying to see more closely,
trying to find reasons. Why is the sharp taste of pepper?
That was what he asked himself one day, and he guessed:
“There must be little points on the particles of pepper and
these points jab the tongue when you eat pepper....”

But are there such little points?

He fussed with dry pepper. He sneezed. He sweat, but
he couldn’t get the grains of pepper small enough to put under
his lens. So, to soften it, he put it to soak for several weeks
in water. Then with fine needles he pried the almost invisible
specks of the pepper apart, and sucked them up in a little drop
of water into one of his hair-fine glass tubes. He looked—

Here was something to make even this determined man
scatter-brained. He forgot about possible small sharp points
on the pepper. With the interest of an intent little boy he
watched the antics of “an incredible number of little animals,
of various sorts, which move very prettily, which tumble about
and sidewise, this way and that!”

So it was Leeuwenhoek stumbled on a magnificent way to
grow his new little animals.

And now to write all this to the great men off there in London!
Artlessly he described his own astonishment to them.
Long page after page in a superbly neat handwriting with little
common words he told them that you could put a million of
these little animals into a coarse grain of sand and that one
drop of his pepper water, where they grew and multiplied so
well, held more than two-million seven-hundred-thousand of
them....

This letter was translated into English. It was read before
the learned skeptics—who no longer believed in the magic
virtues of unicorn’s horns—and it bowled the learned body
over! What! The Dutchman said he had discovered beasts
so small that you could put as many of them into one little
drop of water as there were people in his native country?
Nonsense! The cheese mite was absolutely and without doubt
the smallest creature God had created.

But a few of the members did not scoff. This Leeuwenhoek
was a confoundedly accurate man: everything he had ever
written to them they had found to be true.... So a letter
went back to the scientific janitor, begging him to write them
in detail the way he had made his microscope, and his method
of observing.

That upset Leeuwenhoek. It didn’t matter that these stupid
oafs of Delft laughed at him—but the Royal Society? He
had thought they were philosophers! Should he write them
details, or should he from now on keep everything he did to
himself? “Great God,” you can imagine him muttering,
“these ways I have of uncovering mysterious things, how I
have worked and sweat to learn to do them, what jeering from
how many fools haven’t I endured to perfect my microscopes
and my ways of looking!...”

But creators must have audiences. He knew that these
doubters of the Royal Society should have sweat just as hard
to disprove the existence of his little animals as he himself had
toiled to discover them. He was hurt, but—creators must have
an audience. So he replied to them in a long letter assuring
them he never told anything too big. He explained his calculations
(and modern microbe hunters with all of their apparatus
make only slightly more accurate ones!) he wrote these
calculations out, divisions, multiplications, additions, until his
letter looked like a child’s exercise in arithmetic. He finished
by saying that many people of Delft had seen—with applause!—these
strange new animals under his lens. He would send
them affidavits from prominent citizens of Delft—two men of
God, one notary public, and eight other persons worthy to be
believed. But he wouldn’t tell them how he made his microscopes.

That was a suspicious man! He held his little machines up
for people to look through, but let them so much as touch the
microscope to help themselves to see better and he might order
them out of his house.... He was like a child anxious
and proud to show a large red apple to his playmates but loth
to let them touch it for fear they might take a bite out of it.

So the Royal Society commissioned Robert Hooke and Nehemiah
Grew to build the very best microscopes, and brew
pepper water from the finest quality of black pepper. And, on
the 15th of November, 1677, Hooke came carrying his microscope
to the meeting—agog—for Antony Leeuwenhoek had
not lied. Here they were, those enchanted beasts! The members
rose from their seats and crowded round the microscope.
They peered, they exclaimed: this man must be a wizard observer!
That was a proud day for Leeuwenhoek. And a little
later the Royal Society made him a Fellow, sending him a
gorgeous diploma of membership in a silver case with the coat
of arms of the society on the cover. “I will serve you faithfully
during the rest of my life,” he wrote them. And he was
as good as his word, for he mailed them those conversational
mixtures of gossip and science till he died at the age of ninety.
But send them a microscope? Very sorry, but that was impossible
to do, while he lived. The Royal Society went so far
as to dispatch Doctor Molyneux to make a report on this
janitor-discoverer of the invisible. Molyneux offered Leeuwenhoek
a fine price for one of his microscopes—surely he
could spare one?—for there were hundreds of them in cabinets
that lined his study. But no! Was there anything the gentleman
of the Royal Society would like to see? Here were some
most curious little unborn oysters in a bottle, here were divers
very nimble little animals, and that Dutchman held up his
lenses for the Englishman to peep through, watching all the
while out of the corner of his eye to see that the undoubtedly
most honest visitor didn’t touch anything—or filch anything....

  
  
      ANTONY LEEUWENHOEK

  

“But your instruments are marvelous!” cried Molyneux.
“A thousand times more clear they show things than any lens
we have in England!”

“How I wish, Sir,” said Leeuwenhoek, “that I could show
you my best lens, with my special way of observing, but I
keep that only for myself and do not show it to any one—not
even to my own family.”