II

There never was a less sure man than Leeuwenhoek. He
looked at this bee’s sting or that louse’s leg again and again
and again. He left his specimens sticking on the point of his
strange microscope for months—in order to look at other
things he made more microscopes till he had hundreds of them!—then
he came back to those first specimens to correct his first
mistakes. He never set down a word about anything he peeped
at, he never made a drawing until hundreds of peeps showed
him that, under given conditions, he would always see exactly
the same thing. And then he was not sure! He said:

“People who look for the first time through a microscope
say now I see this and then I see that—and even a skilled observer
can be fooled. On these observations I have spent more
time than many will believe, but I have done them with joy,
and I have taken no notice of those who have said why take
so much trouble and what good is it?—but I do not write for
such people but only for the philosophical!” He worked for
twenty years that way, without an audience.

But at this time, in the middle of the seventeenth century,
great things were astir in the world. Here and there in France
and England and Italy rare men were thumbing their noses at
almost everything that passed for knowledge. “We will no
longer take Aristotle’s say-so, nor the Pope’s say-so,” said these
rebels. “We will trust only the perpetually repeated observations
of our own eyes and the careful weighings of our scales;
we will listen to the answers experiments give us and no other
answers!” So in England a few of these revolutionists started
a society called The Invisible College, it had to be invisible because
that man Cromwell might have hung them for plotters
and heretics if he had heard of the strange questions they were
trying to settle. What experiments those solemn searchers
made! Put a spider in a circle made of the powder of a unicorn’s
horn and that spider can’t crawl out—so said the wisdom
of that day. But these Invisible Collegians? One of
them brought what was supposed to be powdered unicorn’s
horn and another came carrying a little spider in a bottle. The
college crowded around under the light of high candles. Silence,
then the hushed experiment, and here is their report of
it:

“A circle was made with the powder of unicorn’s horn and a
spider set in the middle of it, but it immediately ran out.”

Crude, you exclaim. Of course! But remember that one of
the members of this college was Robert Boyle, founder of the
science of chemistry, and another was Isaac Newton. Such
was the Invisible College, and presently, when Charles II came
to the throne, it rose from its depths as a sort of blind-pig
scientific society to the dignity of the name of the Royal Society
of England. And they were Antony Leeuwenhoek’s first
audience! There was one man in Delft who did not laugh at
Antony Leeuwenhoek, and that was Regnier de Graaf, whom
the Lords and Gentlemen of the Royal Society had made a corresponding
member because he had written them of interesting
things he had found in the human ovary. Already Leeuwenhoek
was rather surly and suspected everybody, but he let de
Graaf peep through those magic eyes of his, those little lenses
whose equal did not exist in Europe or England or the whole
world for that matter. What de Graaf saw through those
microscopes made him ashamed of his own fame and he hurried
to write to the Royal Society:

“Get Antony Leeuwenhoek to write you telling of his discoveries.”

And Leeuwenhoek answered the request of the Royal Society
with all the confidence of an ignorant man who fails to
realize the profound wisdom of the philosophers he addresses.
It was a long letter, it rambled over every subject under the
sun, it was written with a comical artlessness in the conversational
Dutch that was the only language he knew. The title of
that letter was: “A Specimen of some Observations made by a
Microscope contrived by Mr. Leeuwenhoek, concerning Mould
upon the Skin, Flesh, etc.; the Sting of a Bee, etc.” The Royal
Society was amazed, the sophisticated and learned gentlemen
were amused—but principally the Royal Society was astounded
by the marvelous things Leeuwenhoek told them he could see
through his new lenses. The Secretary of the Royal Society
thanked Leeuwenhoek and told him he hoped his first communication
would be followed by others. It was, by hundreds
of others over a period of fifty years. They were talkative letters
full of salty remarks about his ignorant neighbors, of exposures
of charlatans and of skilled explodings of superstitions,
of chatter about his personal health—but sandwiched between
paragraphs and pages of this homely stuff, in almost every letter,
those Lords and Gentlemen of the Royal Society had the
honor of reading immortal and gloriously accurate descriptions
of the discoveries made by the magic eye of that janitor and
shopkeeper. What discoveries!

When you look back at them, many of the fundamental discoveries
of science seem so simple, too absurdly simple. How
was it men groped and fumbled for so many thousands of years
without seeing things that lay right under their noses? So
with microbes. Now all the world has seen them cavorting on
movie screens, many people of little learning have peeped at
them swimming about under lenses of microscopes, the greenest
medical student is able to show you the germs of I don’t
know how many diseases—what was so hard about seeing
microbes for the first time?

But let us drop our sneers to remember that when Leeuwenhoek
was born there were no microscopes but only crude handlenses
that would hardly make a ten-cent piece look as large as
a quarter. Through these—without his incessant grinding of
his own marvelous lenses—that Dutchman might have looked
till he grew old without discovering any creature smaller than a
cheese-mite. You have read that he made better and better
lenses with the fanatical persistence of a lunatic; that he examined
everything, the most intimate things and the most
shocking things, with the silly curiosity of a puppy. Yes, and
all this squinting at bee-stings and mustache hairs and whatnot
were needful to prepare him for that sudden day when he
looked through his toy of a gold-mounted lens at a fraction of
a small drop of clear rain water to discover—

What he saw that day starts this history. Leeuwenhoek was
a maniac observer, and who but such a strange man would have
thought to turn his lens on clear, pure water, just come down
from the sky? What could there be in water but just—water?
You can imagine his daughter Maria—she was nineteen and
she took such care of her slightly insane father!—watching him
take a little tube of glass, heat it red hot in a flame, draw it out
to the thinness of a hair.... Maria was devoted to her father—let
any of those stupid neighbors dare to snigger at him!—but
what in the world was he up to now, with that hair-fine
glass pipe?

You can see her watch that absent-minded wide-eyed man
break the tube into little pieces, go out into the garden to bend
over an earthen pot kept there to measure the fall of the rain.
He bends over that pot. He goes back into his study. He
sticks the little glass pipe onto the needle of his microscope....

What can that dear silly father be up to?

He squints through his lens. He mutters guttural words
under his breath....

Then suddenly the excited voice of Leeuwenhoek: “Come
here! Hurry! There are little animals in this rain water....
They swim! They play around! They are a thousand times
smaller than any creatures we can see with our eyes alone....
Look! See what I have discovered!”

Leeuwenhoek’s day of days had come. Alexander had gone
to India and discovered huge elephants that no Greek had ever
seen before—but those elephants were as commonplace to
Hindus as horses were to Alexander. Cæsar had gone to England
and come upon savages that opened his eyes with wonder—but
these Britons were as ordinary to each other as Roman
centurions were to Cæsar. Balboa? What were his proud
feelings as he looked for the first time at the Pacific? Just the
same that Ocean was as ordinary to a Central American Indian
as the Mediterranean was to Balboa. But Leeuwenhoek? This
janitor of Delft had stolen upon and peeped into a fantastic
sub-visible world of little things, creatures that had lived, had
bred, had battled, had died, completely hidden from and unknown
to all men from the beginning of time. Beasts these
were of a kind that ravaged and annihilated whole races of men
ten million times larger than they were themselves. Beings
these were, more terrible than fire-spitting dragons or hydra-headed
monsters. They were silent assassins that murdered
babes in warm cradles and kings in sheltered places. It was
this invisible, insignificant, but implacable—and sometimes
friendly—world that Leeuwenhoek had looked into for the first
time of all men of all countries.

This was Leeuwenhoek’s day of days....