IV

Those little animals were everywhere! He told the Royal
Society of finding swarms of those sub-visible beings in his
mouth—of all places: “Although I am now fifty years old,”
he wrote, “I have uncommonly well-preserved teeth, because
it is my custom every morning to rub my teeth very hard with
salt, and after cleaning my large teeth with a quill, to rub
them vigorously with a cloth....” But there still were little
bits of white stuff between his teeth, when he looked at them
with a magnifying mirror....

  

What was this white stuff made of?

From his teeth he scraped a bit of this stuff, mixed it with
pure rain water, stuck it in a little tube on to the needle of his
microscope, closed the door of his study—

What was this that rose
from the gray dimness of
his lens into clear distinctness
as he brought the tube
into the focus? Here was
an unbelievably tiny creature,
leaping about in the
water of the tube “like the
fish called a pike.” There
was a second kind that swam forward a little way, then whirled
about suddenly, then tumbled over itself in pretty somersaults.
There were some beings that moved sluggishly and
looked like wee bent sticks, nothing more, but that Dutchman
squinted at them till his eyes were red-rimmed—and they
moved, they were alive, no doubt of it! There was a menagerie
in his mouth! There were creatures shaped like flexible
rods that went to and fro with the stately carriage of
bishops in procession, there were spirals that whirled through
the water like violently animated corkscrews....

Everybody he could get hold of—as well as himself—was an
experimental animal for that curious man. Tired from his
long peering at the little beasts in his own mouth, he went for
a walk under the tall trees that dropped their yellow leaves on
the brown mirrors of the canals; it was hard work, this play of
his, he must rest! But he met an old man, a most interesting
old man: “I was talking to this old man,” wrote Leeuwenhoek
to the Royal Society, “an old man who led a very sober
life, who never used brandy nor tobacco and very seldom wine,
and my eye chanced to fall on his teeth which were badly
grown over and that made me ask him when he had last
cleaned his mouth. I got for answer that he had never cleaned
his teeth in his whole life....”

Away went all thought of his aching eyes. What a zoo of
wee animals must be in this old fellow’s mouth. He dragged
the dirty but virtuous victim of his curiosity into his study—of
course there were millions of wee beasties in that mouth,
but what he wanted particularly to tell the Royal Society was
this: that this old man’s mouth was host to a new kind of
creature, that slid along among the others, bending its body
in graceful bows like a snake—the water in the narrow tube
seemed to be alive with those little fellows!

You may wonder that Leeuwenhoek nowhere in any of those
hundreds of letters makes any mention of the harm these
mysterious new little animals might do to men. He had come
upon them in drinking water, spied upon them in the mouth;
as the years went by he discovered them in the intestines of
frogs and horses, and even in his own discharges; in swarms
he found them on those rare occasions when, as he says, “he
was troubled with a looseness.” But not for a moment did he
guess that his trouble was caused by those little beasts, and
from his unimaginativeness and his carefulness not to jump
to conclusions modern microbe hunters—if they only had time
to study his writings—could learn a great deal. For, during
the last fifty years, literally thousands of microbes have been
described as the authors of hundreds of diseases, when, in the
majority of cases those germs have only been chance residents
in the body at the time it became diseased. Leeuwenhoek was
cautious about calling anything the cause of anything else. He
had a sound instinct about the infinite complicatedness of
everything—that told him the danger of trying to pick out one
cause from the tangled maze of causes which control life....

The years went by. He tended his little dry-goods store, he
saw to it the city hall of Delft was properly swept out, he grew
more and more crusty and suspicious, he looked longer and
longer hours through his hundreds of microscopes, he made
a hundred amazing discoveries. In the tail of a little fish stuck
head first into a glass tube he saw for the first time of all men
the capillary blood vessels through which blood goes from the
arteries to the veins—so he completed the Englishman Harvey’s
discovery of the circulation of the blood. The most
sacred and improper and romantic things in life were only
material for the probing, tireless eyes of his lenses. Leeuwenhoek
discovered the human sperm, and the cold-blooded science
of his searching would have been shocking, if he had not
been such a completely innocent man! The years went by
and all Europe knew about him. Peter the Great of Russia
came to pay his respects to him, and the Queen of England
journeyed to Delft only to look at the wonders to be seen
through the lenses of his microscopes. He exploded countless
superstitions for the Royal Society, and aside from Isaac Newton
and Robert Boyle he was the most famous of their members.
But did these honors turn his head? They couldn’t
turn his head because he had from the first a sufficiently high
opinion of himself! His arrogance was limitless—but it was
equaled by his humility when he thought of that misty unknown
that he knew surrounded himself and all men. He
admired the Dutch God but his real god was truth:

“My determination is not to remain stubbornly with my
ideas but I’ll leave them and go over to others as soon as I am
shown plausible reasons which I can grasp. This is the more
true since I have no other purpose than to place truth before
my eyes so far as it is in my power to embrace it; and to use
the little talent I have received to draw the world away from its
old heathenish superstitions and to go over to the truth and to
stick to it.”

He was an amazingly healthy man, and at the age of eighty
his hand hardly trembled as he held up his microscope for
visitors to peep at his little animals or to exclaim at the unborn
oysters. But he was fond of drinking in the evenings—as
what Dutchman is not?—and his only ill seems to have
been a certain seediness in the morning after such wassail. He
detested physicians—how could they know about the ills of
the body when they didn’t know one thousandth of what he
did about the build of the body? So Leeuwenhoek had his
own theories—and sufficiently foolish they were—about the
cause of this seediness. He knew that his blood was full of
little globules—he had been the first of all men to see them.
He knew those globules had to go through very tiny capillaries
to get from his arteries to his veins—hadn’t he been the man
to discover those wee vessels in a fish tail? Well, after those
hilarious nights of his, his blood got too thick to run properly
from the arteries to the veins! So he would thin it! So he
wrote to the Royal Society:

“When I have supped too heavily of an evening, I drink in
the morning a large number of cups of coffee, and that as hot
as I can drink it, so that the sweat breaks out on me, and if by
so doing I can’t restore my body, a whole apothecary’s shop
couldn’t do much, and that is the only thing I have done for
years when I have felt a fever.”

That hot coffee drinking led him to another curious fact
about the little animals. Everything he did led him to pry
up some new fact of nature, for he lived wrapped in those tiny
dramas that went on under his lenses just as a child listens
open-mouthed with saucer eyes to the myths of Mother
Goose.... He never tired of reading the same story of nature,
there were always new angles to be found in it, the pages
of his book of nature were thumbed and dog-eared by his insatiable
interest. Years after his discovery of the microbes
in his mouth one morning in the midst of his sweating from
his vast curative coffee drinkings he looked once more at the
stuff between his teeth—

What was this? There was not a single little animal to be
found. Or there were no living animals rather, for he thought
he could make out the bodies of myriads of dead ones—and
maybe one or two that moved feebly, as if they were sick.
“Blessed Saints!” he growled: “I hope some great Lord of the
Royal Society doesn’t try to find those creatures in his mouth,
and fail, and then deny my observations....”

But look here! He had been drinking coffee, so hot it had
blistered his lips, almost. He had looked for the little animals
in the white stuff from between his front teeth. It was just
after the coffee he had looked there—Well?

With the help of a magnifying mirror he went at his back
teeth. Presto! “With great surprise I saw an incredibly
large number of little animals, and in such an unbelievable
quantity of the aforementioned stuff, that it is not to be conceived
of by those who have not seen it with their own eyes.”
Then he made delicate experiment in tubes, heating the water
with its tiny population to a temperature a little warmer than
that of a hot bath. In a moment the creatures stopped their
agile runnings to and fro. He cooled the water. They did
not come back to life—so! It was that hot coffee that had
killed the beasties in his front teeth!

With what delight he watched them once more! But he
was bothered, he was troubled, for he couldn’t make out the
heads or tails of any of his little animals. After wiggling forward
in one direction they stopped, they reversed themselves
and swam backward just as swiftly without having turned
around. But they must have heads and tails! They must
have livers and brains and blood vessels as well! His thoughts
floated back to his work of forty years before, when he had
found that under his powerful lenses fleas and cheese mites,
so crude and simple to the naked eye, had become as complicated
and as perfect as human beings. But try as he would,
with the best lenses he had, and those little animals in his
mouth were just plain sticks of spheres or corkscrews. So
he contented himself by calculating, for the Royal Society,
what the diameter of the invisible blood vessels of his
microbes must be—but mind you, he never for a moment
hinted that he had seen such blood vessels; it only amused him
to stagger his patrons by speculations of their unthinkable
smallness.

If Antony Leeuwenhoek failed to see the germs that cause
human disease, if he had too little imagination to predict the
rôle of assassin for his wretched creatures, he did show that
sub-visible beasts could devour and kill living beings much
larger than they were themselves. He was fussing with mussels,
shellfish that he dredged up out of the canals of Delft.
He found thousands of them unborn inside their mothers. He
tried to make these young ones develop outside their mothers
in a glass of canal water. “I wonder,” he muttered, “why our
canals are not choked with mussels, when the mothers have
each one so many young ones inside them!” Day after day
he poked about in his glass of water with its slimy mass of
embryos, he turned his lens on to them to see if they were growing—but
what was this? Astounded he watched the fishy stuff
disappear from between their shells—it was being gobbled up
by thousands of tiny microbes that were attacking the mussels
greedily....

“Life lives on life—it is cruel, but it is God’s will,” he pondered.
“And it is for our good, of course, because if there
weren’t little animals to eat up the young mussels, our canals
would be choked by those shellfish, for each mother has more
than a thousand young ones at a time!” So Antony Leeuwenhoek
accepted everything and praised everything, and in this
he was a child of his time, for in his century searchers had not
yet, like Pasteur who came after them, begun to challenge
God, to shake their fists at the meaningless cruelties of nature
toward mankind, her children....

He passed eighty, and his teeth came loose as they had to
even in his strong body; he didn’t complain at the inexorable
arrival of the winter of his life, but he jerked out that old
tooth and turned his lens onto the little creatures he found
within that hollow root—why shouldn’t he study them once
more? There might be some little detail he had missed those
hundred other times! Friends came to him at eighty-five and
told him to take it easy and leave his studies. He wrinkled his
brow and opened wide his still bright eyes: “The fruits that
ripen in autumn last the longest!” he told them—he called
eighty-five the autumn of his life!

Leeuwenhoek was a showman. He was very pleased to
hear the ohs and ahs of people—they must be philosophical
people and lovers of science, mind you!—whom he let peep
into his sub-visible world or to whom he wrote his disjointed
marvelous letters of description. But he was no teacher.
“I’ve never taught one,” he wrote to the famous philosopher
Leibniz, “because if I taught one, I’d have to teach others....
I would give myself over to a slavery, whereas I want to stay
a free man.”

“But the art of grinding fine lenses and making observations
of these new creatures will disappear from the earth, if
you don’t teach young men,” answered Leibniz.

“The professors and students of the University of Leyden
were long ago dazzled by my discoveries, they hired three lens
grinders to come to teach the students, but what came of it?”
wrote that independent Dutchman.

“Nothing, so far as I can judge, for almost all of the courses
they teach there are for the purpose of getting money through
knowledge or for gaining the respect of the world by showing
people how learned you are, and these things have nothing to
do with discovering the things that are buried from our eyes.
I am convinced that of a thousand people not one is capable of
carrying out such studies, because endless time is needed and
much money is spilled and because a man has always to be
busy with his thoughts if anything is to be accomplished....”

That was the first of the microbe hunters. In 1723, when
he was ninety-one years old and on his deathbed, he sent for
his friend Hoogvliet. He could not lift his hand. His once
glowing eyes were rheumy and their lids were beginning to
stick fast with the cement of death. He mumbled:

“Hoogvliet, my friend, be so good as to have those two
letters on the table translated into Latin.... Send them to
London to the Royal Society....”

So he kept his promise made fifty years before, and Hoogvliet
wrote, along with those last letters: “I send you, learned
sirs, this last gift of my dying friend, hoping that his final
word will be agreeable to you.”

So he passed, this first of the microbe hunters. You will
read of Spallanzani, who was much more brilliant, of Pasteur
who had a thousand times his imagination, of Robert Koch
who did much more immediate apparent good in lifting the
torments that microbes bring to men—these and all the others
have much more fame to-day. But not one of them has been
so completely honest, so appallingly accurate as this Dutch
janitor, and all of them could take lessons from his splendid
common sense.