IV

“So Needham says heat damages the Force in the seeds,
does he? Has he tried it? How can he see or feel or weigh
or measure this Vegetative Force? He says it is in the seeds,
well, we’ll heat the seeds and see!”

Spallanzani got out his flasks once more and cleaned them.
He brewed mixtures of different kinds of seeds, of peas and
beans and vetches with pure water, until his work room almost
ran over with flasks—they perched on high shelves, they sat
on tables and chairs, they cluttered the floor so it was hard to
walk around.

“Now, we’ll boil a whole series of these flasks different
lengths of time, and see which one generates the most little
animals,” he said, and then doused one set of his soups in boiling
water for a few minutes, another for a half hour, another
for an hour, and still another for two hours. Instead of sealing
them in the flame he plugged them all up with corks—Needham
said that was enough—and then he put them carefully
away to see what would happen. He waited. He went
off fishing and forgot to pull up his rod when a fish bit, he
collected minerals for his museum, and forgot to take them
home with him. He plotted for higher pay, he said masses, and
studied the copulation of frogs and toads—and then disappeared
once more to his dim work room with its regiments of
bottles and weird machines. He waited.

If Needham were right, the flasks boiled for minutes should
be alive with little animals, but the ones boiled for an hour
or two hours should be deserted. He pulled out the corks one
by one, and looked at the drops of soup through his lens and
at last laughed with delight—the bottles that had been boiled
for two hours actually had more little animals sporting about
in them than the ones he had heated for a few minutes.

“Vegetative Force, what nonsense! so long as you only plug
up your flasks with corks the little animals will get in from
the air. You can heat your soups till you’re black in the face—the
microbes will get in just the same and grow, after the
broth has cooled.”

Spallanzani was triumphant, but then he did the curious
thing that only born scientists ever do—he tried to beat his
own idea, his darling theory—by experiments he honestly and
shrewdly planned to defeat himself. That is science! That
is the strange self-forgetting spirit of a few rare men, those
curious men to whom truth is more dear than their own cherished
whims and wishes. Spallanzani walked up and down
his narrow work room, hands behind him, meditating—“Wait,
maybe after all Needham has guessed right, maybe there is
some mysterious force in these seeds that strong heat might
destroy.”

Then he cleaned his flasks again, and took some seeds, but
instead of merely boiling them in water, he put them in a
coffee-roaster and baked them till they were soot-colored
cinders. Next he poured pure distilled water over them, growling:
“Now if there was a Vegetative Force in those seeds, I
have surely roasted it to death.”

Days later when he came back to his flasks, with their soups
brewed from the burned seeds, he smiled a sarcastic smile—a
smile that meant squirmings for Buffon and Needham—for
as one bottle after another yielded its drops of soup to his lens,
every drop from every bottle was alive with wee animals that
swam up and down in the liquid and went to and fro, living
their funny limited little lives as gayly as any animals in the
best soup made from unburned seeds. He had tried to defeat
his own theory, and so trying had licked the pious Needham
and the precious Buffon. They had said that heat would kill
their Force so that no little animals could arise—and here were
seeds charred to carbon, furnishing excellent food for the small
creatures—this so-called Force was a myth! Spallanzani proclaimed
this to all of Europe, which now began to listen to
him.

Then he relaxed from his hard pryings into the loves and
battles and deaths of little animals by making deep studies of
the digestion of food in the human stomach—and to do this
he experimented cruelly on himself. This was not enough, so
he had to launch into weird investigations in the hot dark attic
of his house, on the strange problem of how bats can keep
from bumping into things although they cannot see. In the
midst of this he found time to help educate his little nephews
and to take care of his brother and sister, obscure beings who
did not share his genius—but they were of his blood, and he
loved them.

But he soon came back to the mysterious question of how
life arises, that question which his religion taught him to ignore,
to accept with blind faith as a miracle of the Creator. He
didn’t work with little animals only; instead he turned his
curiosity onto larger ones, and began vast researches on the
mating of toads. “What is the cause of the violent and persistent
way in which the male toad holds the female?” he
asked himself, and his wonder at this strange event set his
ingenious brain to devising experiments of an unheard-of barbarity.

He didn’t do them out of any fiendish whim to hurt the
father toad—but this man must know every fact that could
possibly be known about how new toads arose. What will
make the toad let go this grip? And that mad priest cut off
a male toad’s hind legs in the midst of its copulation—but the
dying animal did not relax that blind grasp to which nature
drove it. Spallanzani mused over his bizarre experiment.
“This persistence of the toad,” he said, “is due less to his
obtuseness of feeling than to the vehemence of his passion.”

In his sniffing search for knowledge which let him stop at
nothing, he was led by an instinct that drove him into heartless
experiments on animals—but it made him do equally cruel
and fantastic tests on himself. He studied the digestion of
food in the stomach, he gulped down hollowed-out blocks of
wood with meat inside them, then tickled his throat and made
himself vomit them up again so that he could find out what
had happened to the meat inside the blocks. He kept insanely
at this self-torture, until, as he admitted at last, a horrid
nausea made him stop the experiments.

Spallanzani held immense correspondences with half the
doubters and searchers of Europe. By mail he was a great
friend of that imp, Voltaire. He complained that there were
few men of talent in Italy, the air was too humid and foggy—he
became a leader of that impudent band of scientists and
philosophers who unknowingly prepared the bloodiest of revolutions
while they tried so honestly to find truth and establish
happiness and justice in the world. These men believed
that Spallanzani had spiked once for all that nonsense about
animals—even the tiniest ones—arising spontaneously. Led
by Voltaire they cracked vast jokes about the Vegetative Force
and its parents, the pompous Buffon and his laboratory boy,
Father Needham.

“But there is a Vegetative Force,” cried Needham, “a mysterious
something—I’ll admit you can’t see it or weigh it—that
can make life arise out of gravy or soup or out of nothing at
all, perhaps. Maybe it can stand all of that roasting that
Spallanzani applies to it, but what it needs particularly is a
very elastic air to help it. And when Spallanzani boils his
flasks for an hour, he hurts the elasticity of the air inside the
flasks!”

Spallanzani was up in arms in a moment, and bawled for
Needham’s experiments. “Has he heated air to see if it got less
elastic?” The Italian waited for experiments—and got only
words. “Then I’ll have to test it out myself,” he said, and
once again he put seeds in rows of flasks and sealed off their
necks in a flame—and boiled them for an hour. Then one
morning he went to his laboratory, and cracked off the neck
of one of his bottles....

He cocked his ear—he heard a little wh-i-s-s-s-s-t. “What’s
this,” he muttered, and grabbed another bottle and cracked
off its neck, holding his ear close by. Wh-i-s-s-st! There it
was again. “That means the air is coming out of my bottle,
or going into it,” he cried, and he lighted a candle and ingeniously
held it near the neck of a third flask as he cracked
the seal.

The flame sucked inward toward the opening.

“The air’s going in—that means the air in the bottle is less
elastic than the air outside, that means maybe Needham is
right!”

For a moment Spallanzani had a queer feeling at the pit of
his stomach, his forehead was wet with nervous sweat, his
world tottered around him.... Could that fool Needham
have made a lucky stab, a clever guess about what heat did to
air in sealed up flasks? Could this windbag knock out all of
this careful finding of facts, which had taken so many years
of hard work? For days Spallanzani went about troubled,
and snapped at students to whom before he had been gentle,
and tried to comfort himself by reciting Dante and Homer—and
this only made him more grumpy. A relentless torturing
imp pricked at him and this imp said: “Find out why the air
rushes into your flasks when you break the seals—it may not
have anything to do with elasticity.” The imp woke him up
in the night, it made him get tangled up in his masses....

Then like a flash of lightning the explanation came to him
and he hurried to his work bench—it was covered with broken
flasks and abandoned bottles and its muddled disarray told
his discouragement—he reached into a cupboard and took out
one of his flasks. He was on the track, he would show Needham
was wrong, and even before he had proved it he stretched
himself with a heave of relief—so sure was he that the reason
for the little whistling of air had come to him. He looked at
the flasks, then smiled and said, “All the flasks that I have been
using have fairly wide necks. When I seal them in the flame
it takes a lot of heat to melt the glass till the neck is shut off—all
that heat drives most of the air out of the bottle before it’s
sealed up. No wonder the air rushes in when I crack the
seal!”

He saw that Needham’s idea that boiling water outside the
flask damaged the elasticity of the air inside was nonsense,
nothing less. But how to prove this, how to seal up the flasks
without driving out the air? His devilish ingenuity came to
help him, and he took another flask, put seeds into it, and filled
it partly with pure water. Then he rolled the neck of the bottle
around in a hot flame until it melted down to a tiny narrow
opening—very, very narrow, but still open to the air outside.
Next he let the flask cool—now the air inside must be
the same as the air outside—then he applied a tiny flame to
the now almost needle-fine opening. In a jiffy the flask was
sealed—without expelling any of the air from the inside. Content,
he put the bottle in boiling water and watched it bump
and dance in the kettle for an hour and while he watched he
recited verses and hummed gay tunes. He put the flask away
for days, then one morning, sure of his result, he came to his
laboratory to open it. He lighted a candle; he held it close to
the flask neck; carefully he broke the seal—wh-i-s-s-s-t! But
the flame blew away from the flask this time—the elasticity
of the air inside the flask was greater than that outside!

All of the long boiling had not damaged the air at all—it
was even more elastic than before—and elasticity was what
Needham said was necessary for his wonderful Vegetative
Force. The air in the flask was super-elastic, but fishing drop
after drop of the soup inside, Spallanzani couldn’t find a single
little animal. Again and again, with the obstinacy of a Leeuwenhoek,
he repeated the same experiment. He broke flasks
and spilled boiling water down his shirt-front, he seared his
hands, he made vast tests that had to be done over—but always
he confirmed his first result.