V

Triumphant he shouted his last experiment to Europe, and
Needham and Buffon heard it, and had to sit sullenly amid
the ruins of their silly theory, there was nothing to say—Spallanzani
had spiked their guns with a simple fact. Then
the Italian sat down to do a little writing himself. A virtuoso
in the laboratory, he was a fiend with his quill, when once he
was sure his facts had destroyed Needham’s pleasant myth
about life arising spontaneously. Spallanzani was sure now
that even the littlest beasts had to come—always—from beasts
that had lived before. He was certain too, that a wee microbe
always remained a microbe of the same kind that its parents
had been, just as a zebra doesn’t turn into a giraffe, or have
musk-oxen for children, but always stays a zebra—and has
zebra babies.

“In short,” shouted Spallanzani, “Needham is wrong, and
I have proved that there is a law and order in the science of
animals, just as there is in the working of the stars.”

Then he told the muddle that Needham would have turned
the science of little animals into—if good facts hadn’t been
found to beat him. What animals this weird Vegetative Force
could make—what tricks it could do—if it had only existed!
“It could make,” said Spallanzani, “a microscopic animal
found sometimes in infusions, which like a new Protean, ceaselessly
changes its form, appearing now as a body thin as a
thread, now in an oval or spherical form, sometimes coiled like
a serpent, adorned with rays and armed with horns. This remarkable
animal furnishes Needham an example, to explain
easily how the Vegetative Force produces now a frog and again
a dog, sometimes a midge and at others an elephant, to-day a
spider and to-morrow a whale, this minute a cow and the next
a man.”

So ended Needham—and his Vegetative Force. It became
comfortable to live once more; you felt sure there was no
mysterious sinister Force sneaking around waiting to change
you into a hippopotamus.

Spallanzani’s name glittered in all the universities of Europe;
the societies considered him the first scientist of the day;
Frederick the Great wrote long letters to him and with his own
hand made him a member of the Berlin Academy; and Frederick’s
bitter enemy, Maria Theresa, Empress of Austria, put
it over the great king by offering Spallanzani the job of professor
in her ancient and run-down University of Pavia, in
Lombardy. A pompous commission came, a commission of
eminent Privy Councillors weighed down with letters and Imperial
Seals and begged Spallanzani to put this defunct college
on its feet. There were vast interminable arguments and
bargainings about salary—Spallanzani always knew how to
feather his nest—bargains that ended in his taking the job of
Professor of Natural History and Curator of the Natural History
Cabinet of Pavia.

Spallanzani went to the Museum, the Natural History Cabinet,
and found that cupboard bare. He rolled up his sleeves,
he lectured about everything, he made huge public experiments
and he awed his students because his deft hands always made
these experiments turn out successfully. He sent here and
there for an astounding array of queer beasts and strange
plants and unknown birds—to fill up the empty Cabinet. He
climbed dangerous mountains himself and brought back minerals
and precious ores; he caught hammer-head sharks and
snared gay-plumed fowl; he went on incredible collecting expeditions
for his museum—and to work off that tormenting
energy that made him so fantastically different from the popular
picture of a calm scientist. He was a Roosevelt with all
of Teddy’s courage and appeal to the crowd, but with none of
Teddy’s gorgeous inaccuracy.

In the intervals of this hectic collecting and lecturing he
shut himself in his laboratory with his stews and his microscopic
animals, and made long experiments to show that these
beasts obey nature’s laws, just as men and horses and elephants
are forced to follow them. He put drops of stews
swarming with microbes on little pieces of glass and blew tobacco
smoke at them and watched them eagerly with his lens.
He cried out his delight as he saw them rush about trying to
avoid the irritating smoke. He shot electric sparks at them
and wondered at the way the little animals “became giddy”
and spun about, and quickly died.

“The seeds or eggs of the little animals may be different
from chicken eggs or frog’s eggs or fish eggs—they may stand
the heat of boiling water in my sealed flasks—but otherwise
these little creatures are really no different from other animals!”
he cried. Then just after that he had to take back his
confident words....

“Every beast on earth needs air to live, and I am going to
show just how animal these little animals are by putting them
in a vacuum—and watching them die,” said Spallanzani to himself,
alone one day in his laboratory. He cleverly drew out
some very thin tubes of glass, like the ones Leeuwenhoek had
used to study his little animals. He dipped the tube into a soup
that swarmed with his microbes; the fluid rushed up into the
hair-fine pipe. Then Spallanzani sealed off one end of it, and
ingeniously tied the other end to a powerful vacuum pump,
and set the pump going, and stuck his lens against the thin
wall of the tube. He expected to see the wee animals stop
waving the “little arms which they were furnished to swim
with;” he expected them to get giddy and then stop moving....

The pump chugged on—and nothing whatever happened to
the microbes. They went nonchalantly about their business
and did not seem to realize there was such a thing as life-maintaining
air! They lived for days, for weeks—and Spallanzani
did the experiment again and again, trying to find something
wrong with it. This was impossible—nothing can live without
air—how the devil do these beasts breathe? He wrote his
amazement in a letter to his friend Bonnet:

“The nature of some of these animalcules is astonishing!
They are able to exercise in a vacuum the functions they use
in free air. They make all of their courses, they go up and
down in the liquid, they even multiply for several days in this
vacuum. How wonderful this is! For we have always believed
there is no living being that can live without the advantages
air offers it.”

Spallanzani was very proud of his imagination and his quick
brain and he was helped along in this conceit by the flattery
and admiration of students and intelligent ladies and learned
professors and conquering kings. But he was an experimenter
too—he was really an experimenter first, and he bent his head
humbly when a new fact defeated one of the brilliant
guesses of his brain.

Meanwhile this man who was so rigidly honest in his experiments,
who would never report anything but the truth of
what he found amid the smells and poisonous vapors and shining
machines of his laboratory, this superbly honest scientist,
I say, was planning low tricks to increase his pay as Professor
at Pavia. Spallanzani, the football player, the climber of
mountains and explorer, this Spallanzani whined to the authorities
at Vienna about his feeble health—the fogs and
vapors of Pavia were like to make him die, he said. To keep
him the Emperor had to increase his pay and double his vacations.
Spallanzani laughed and cynically called his lie a political
gesture! He always got everything he wanted. He got
truth by dazzling experiments and close observation and insane
patience; he obtained money and advancement by work—and
by cunning plots and falsehoods; he received protection
from religious persecution by becoming a priest!

Now, as he grew older, he began to hanker for wild researches
in regions remote from his little laboratory. He must
visit the site of ancient Troy whose story thrilled him so; he
must see the harems and slaves and eunuchs, which to him
were as much a part of natural history as his bats and toads
and little animals of the seed infusions. He pulled wires, and
at last the Emperor Joseph gave him a year’s leave of absence
and the money for a trip to Constantinople—for his failing
health, which had never been more superb.

So Spallanzani put his rows of flasks away and locked his
laboratory and said a dramatic and tearful good-by to his
students; on the journey down the Mediterranean he got
frightfully sea-sick, he was shipwrecked—but didn’t forget to
try to save the specimens he had collected on some islands.
The Sultan wined and dined him, the doctors of the seraglios
let him study the customs of the beauteous concubines ...
and afterward, good eighteenth century European that he was,
Spallanzani told the Turks that he admired their hospitality
and their architecture, but detested their custom of slavery
and their hopeless fatalistic view of life....

“We Westerners, through this new science of ours, are going
to conquer the seemingly unavoidable, the apparently eternal
torture and suffering of man,” you can imagine him telling his
polite but stick-in-the-mud Oriental friends. He believed in an
all powerful God, but while he believed, the spirit of the
searcher, the fact finder, flashed out of his eye, burdened all
his thought and talk, forced him to make excuses for God by
calling him Nature and the Unknown, compelled him to show
that he had appointed himself first-assistant to God in the discovery
and even the conquering of this unknown Nature.

  
  
      LAZZARO SPALLANZANI

  

After many months he returned overland through the Balkan
Peninsula, escorted by companies of crack soldiers, entertained
by Bulgarian dukes and Wallachian Hospodars. At last he
came to Vienna, to pay his respects to his boss and patron, the
Emperor Joseph II—it was the dizziest moment, so far as
honors went, of his entire career. Drunk with success, he
thought, you may imagine, of how all of his dreams had come
true, and then——