V

Pasteur was now presented to the Emperor Napoleon III.
He told that dreamy gentleman that his whole ambition was to
find the microbes that he was sure must be the cause of disease.
He was invited to an imperial house party at Compiègne.
The guests were commanded to get ready to go hunting, but
Pasteur begged to be excused; he had had a dray load of apparatus
sent up from Paris—though he was only staying at the
palace for a week!—and he impressed their Imperial Majesties
enormously by bending over his microscope while everybody
else was occupied with frivolous and gay amusements.

The world must know that microbes have got to have parents!
At Paris he made a popular speech at the scientific
soirée at the Sorbonne, before Alexandre Dumas, the novelist,
and the woman genius, George Sand, the Princess Mathilde,
and a hundred more smart people. That night he staged a
scientific vaudeville that sent his audience home in awe and
worry; he showed them lantern slides of a dozen different kinds
of germs; mysteriously he darkened the hall and suddenly shot
a single bright beam of light through the blackness. “Observe
the thousands of dancing specks of dust in the path of this
ray,” he cried; “the air of this hall is filled with these specks of
dust, these thousands of little nothings that you should not
despise always, for sometimes they carry disease and death;
the typhus, the cholera, the yellow fever and many other pestilences!”
This was dreadful news; his audience shuddered,
convinced by his sincerity. Of course this news was not
strictly true, but Pasteur was no mountebank—he believed it
himself! Dust and the microbes of the dust had become his
life—he was obsessed with dust. At dinner, even at the smartest
houses, he would hold his plates and spoons close up to his
nose, peer at them, scour them with his napkin, he was with
a vengeance putting microbes on the map....

Every Frenchman from the Emperor down was becoming excited
about Pasteur and his microbes. Whisperings of mysterious
and marvelous events seeped through the gates of the Normal
School. Students, even professors, passed the laboratory
a little atremble with awe. One student might be heard remarking
to another, as they passed the high gray walls of the Normal
School in the Rue d’Ulm: “There is a man working here—his
name is Pasteur—who is finding out wonderful things about
the machinery of life, he knows even about the origin of life,
he is even going to find out, perhaps, what causes disease....”
So Pasteur succeeded in getting another year added to the
course of scientific studies; new laboratories began to go up;
his students shed tears of emotion at the fiery eloquence of his
lectures. He talked about microbes causing disease long before
he knew anything about whether or not they caused disease—he
hadn’t yet got his fingers at the throats of mysterious
plagues and dreadful deaths, but he knew there were other
ways to interest the public, to arouse even such a hardheaded
person as the average Frenchman.

“I beg you,” he addressed the French people in a passionate
pamphlet, “take some interest in those sacred dwellings meaningly
called laboratories. Ask that they be multiplied and
completed. They are the temples of the future, of riches and
comfort.” Fifty years ahead of his time as a forward-looking
prophet, he held fine austere ideals up to his countrymen while
he appealed to their wishes for a somewhat piggish material
happiness. A good microbe hunter, he was much more than a
mere wool-gathering searcher, much more than a mere man of
science....

Once more he started out to show all of France how science
could save money for her industry; he packed up boxes of
glassware and an eager assistant, Duclaux, and bustled off to
Arbois, his old home—he hurried off up there to study the diseases
of wine—to save the imperiled wine industry. He set up
his laboratory in what had been an old café and instead of gas
burners he had to be satisfied with an open charcoal brazier
that the enthusiastic Duclaux kept glowing with a pair of bellows;
from time to time Duclaux would scamper across to the
town pump for water; their clumsy apparatus was made by
the village carpenter and tinsmith. Pasteur rushed around to
his friends of long ago and begged bottles of wine, bitter wine,
ropy wine, oily wine; he knew from his old researches that it
was yeasts that changed grapejuice into wine—he felt certain
that it must be some other wee microscopic being that made
wines go bad.

Sure enough! When he turned his lens on to ropy wines he
found them swarming with very tiny curious microbes hitched
together like strings of beads; he found the bottles of bitter
wine infested with another kind of beast and the kegs of turned
wine by still another. Then he called the winegrowers and the
merchants of the region together and proceeded to show them
magic.

“Bring me a half dozen bottles of wine that has gone bad
with different sicknesses,” he asked them. “Do not tell me
what is wrong with them, and I’ll tell you what ails them
without tasting them.” The winegrowers didn’t believe
him; among each other they snickered at him as they went to
fetch the bottles of sick wine; they laughed at the fantastic
machinery in the old café; they took Pasteur for some kind of
earnest lunatic. They planned to fool him and brought him
bottles of perfectly good wine among the sick ones. Then he
set about flabbergasting them! With a slender glass tube he
sucked a drop of wine out of a bottle and put it between two
little slips of glass before his microscope. The wine raisers
nudged each other and winked French winks of humorous common
sense, while Pasteur sat hunched over his microscope,
and they became more merry as minutes passed....

Suddenly he looked at them and said: “There is nothing the
matter with this wine—give it to the taster—let him see if I’m
right.”

The taster did his tasting, then puckered up his purple nose
and admitted that Pasteur was correct; and so it went through
a long row of bottles—when Pasteur looked up from his microscopes
and prophesied: “Bitter wine”—it turned out to be bitter;
and when he foretold that the next sample was ropy, the
taster acknowledged that ropy was right!

The wine raisers mumbled their thanks and lifted their hats
to him as they left. “We don’t get the way he does this—but
he is a very clever man, very, very clever,” they muttered.
That is much for a peasant Frenchman to admit....

When they left, Pasteur and Duclaux worked triumphantly
in their tumbledown laboratory; they tackled the question of
how to keep these microbes out of healthy wines—they found
at last that if you heat wine just after it has finished fermenting,
even if you heat it gently, way below the point of boiling,
the microbes that have no business in the wine will be killed—and
the wine will not become sick. That little trick is now
known to everybody by the name of pasteurization.

Now that people of the East of France had been shown how
to keep their wine from going bad, the people of the middle of
France clamored for Pasteur to come and save their vinegar-making
industry. So he rushed down to Tours. He had got
used to looking for microscopic beings in all kinds of things by
now—he no longer groped as he had had to do at first; he approached
the vinegar kegs, where wine was turning itself into
vinegar, he saw a peculiar-looking scum on the surface of the
liquor in the barrels. “That scum has to be there, otherwise
we get no vinegar,” explained the manufacturers. In a few
weeks of swift, sure-fingered investigation that astonished the
vinegar-makers and their wives, Pasteur found that the scum
on the kegs was nothing more nor less than billions upon billions
of microscopic creatures. He took off great sheets of this
scum and tested it and weighed it and fussed with it, and at
last he told an audience of vinegar-makers and their wives and
families that the microbes which change wine to vinegar actually
eat up and turn into vinegar ten thousand times their own
weight of alcohol in a few days. What gigantic things these
infinitely tiny beings can do—think of a man of two hundred
pounds chopping two millions of pounds of wood in four days!
It was by some such homely comparison as this one that he
made microbes part of these humble people’s lives, it was so
that he made them respect these miserably small creatures; it
was by pondering on their fiendish capacity for work that
Pasteur himself got used to the idea that there was nothing so
strange about a tiny beast, no larger than the microbe of
vinegar, getting into an ox or an elephant or a man—and doing
him to death. Before he left them he showed the people of
Tours how to cultivate and care for those useful wee creatures
that so strangely added oxygen to wine to turn it into vinegar—and
millions of francs for them.

These successes made Pasteur drunk with confidence in his
method of experiment; he began to dream impossible gaudy
dreams—of immense discoveries and super-Napoleonic microbe
huntings—and he did more than brood alone over these
dreams; he put them into speeches and preached them. He became,
in a word, a new John the Baptist of the religion of the
Germ Theory, but unlike the unlucky Baptist, Pasteur was a
forerunner who lived to see at least some of his prophecies come
true.

Then for a short time he worked quietly in his laboratory in
Paris—there was nothing for him to save just then—until one
day in 1865 Fate came to his door and knocked. Fate in the
guise of his old professor, Dumas, called on him and asked him
to change himself from a man of science into a silkworm doctor.
“What’s wrong with silkworms? I did not know that
they ever had diseases—I know nothing at all about silkworms—what’s
more, I have never even seen one!” protested
Pasteur.