VI

Compared to this sly murderer the bacillus of anthrax had
been reasonably easy to discover—it was a large bug as microbes
go, and the bodies of sick animals were literally alive
with anthrax germs when the beasts were about to die. But
this tubercle germ—if indeed there was such a creature—was
a different matter. Many searchers were looking in vain for
it. Leeuwenhoek, with his sharpest of all eyes, would never
have found it even if he had looked at a hundred sick lungs;
Spallanzani’s microscopes would not have been good enough to
have revealed this sly microbe; Pasteur, searcher that he was,
had neither the precise methods of searching, nor, perhaps, the
patience, to lay bare this assassin.

All that was known about tuberculosis was that it must be
caused by some kind of microbe, since it could be transmitted
from sick men to healthy animals. An old Frenchman, Villemin,
had pioneered in this work, and Cohnheim, the brilliant
professor of Breslau, had found that he could give tuberculosis
to rabbits—by putting a bit of the consumptive’s sick lung
into the front chamber of a rabbit’s eye. Here Cohnheim
could watch the little islands of sick tissue—the tubercles—spread
and do their deadly work; it was a strange clever experiment
that was like looking through a window at a disease
growing....

Koch had studied Cohnheim’s experiments closely. “This
is what I need,” he meditated. “I may not use human beings
for experimental animals, but now I can give the disease,
whenever I wish, to animals ... here is a real chance to
study it, handle it, to look for the microbe that must cause
it ... there must be a microbe there....”

So Koch set to work—he did everything with a cold system
that gives one the shivers when one reads his scientific reports—and
he got his first consumptive stuff from a powerful man,
a laborer aged thirty-six. This man had been superbly healthy
three weeks before, when all at once he began to cough, little
pains shot through his chest, his body seemed literally to melt
away. Four days after this poor fellow entered the hospital,
he was dead, riddled with tubercles—every organ was peppered
with little grayish-yellow, millet-seed-like specks——

With this dangerous stuff Koch set to work, alone, for
Loeffler had set out to track down the microbe of diphtheria
and Gaffky was busy trying to find the sub-visible author of
typhoid fever. Koch, meanwhile, crushed the yellowish tubercles
from the body of the dead man between two heated
knives; he ground these granules up and delicately, with a
little syringe, injected them into the eyes of numerous rabbits
and under the skins of flocks of foolish guinea-pigs. He put
these beasts in clean cages and tended them lovingly. And
while he waited for his creatures to develop signs of the consumption,
he began to peer with his most powerful microscope
through the sick tissues that he had taken from the body
of the dead workman.

For days he saw nothing. His best lenses, that magnified
many hundred times, showed him only the dead ruins of what
had once been good healthy lung or liver. “If there is a tubercle
microbe, he is such a sneaky fellow that I won’t be able,
perhaps, to see him in his native state. But I can try painting
the tissue with a powerful dye—that may make this bug stand
out....”

Day after day, Koch set about staining the stuff from the
dead workman brown and blue and violet and most of the
colors of the rainbow. Carefully, dipping his hands in the
germ-killing bichloride of mercury after almost every move—blackening
and wrinkling them with it—he smeared the perilous
material from the tubercles on thin clean bits of glass and
kept these pieces of glass for hours in a strong blue dye....

Then one morning he took his specimens out of their bath
of stain, and put them under his lens, and focussed his microscope
and out of the gray mist a strange picture untangled itself.
Lying among the shattered diseased lung cells were curious
masses of little, infinitely thin bacilli—blue-colored rods—so
slim that he could not guess their size, and they were less
than a fifteen-thousandth of an inch long.

“Ah! they are pretty,” he muttered. “They’re not straight
like the anthrax bugs ... they have little bends and curves
in them. Wait! here are whole bunches of them ... like
cigarettes in a pack—Heh! here is one lone devil inside a lung
cell ... I wonder ... have I found him—that tubercle
bug, already?”

Koch went on, precisely, with that efficiency of his, to staining
tubercles from every part of the workman’s body, and
everywhere his blue dye showed up these same slender crooked
bacilli—strange creatures unlike any he had seen in all the
thousands of animals or men, diseased or healthy, into whose
insides he had pried. And now, sorry things began to happen
to his inoculated guinea-pigs and rabbits. The guinea-pigs
began to huddle disconsolately in the corners of their cages;
their sleek coats ruffled and their bouncing little bodies began
to fall away until they were sad bags of bones. They were
feverish, their cavortings stopped and they looked listlessly at
their fine carrots and their fragrant meals of hay—and one by
one they died. And as these unconscious martyrs died—for
Koch’s mad curiosity and for suffering men—the little microbe
hunter pinned them down on his post-mortem board and
soaked their sick hair with bichloride of mercury and precisely
and with breathless care cut them open with sterile knives.

And inside these poor beasts Koch found the same kind of
grayish-yellow sinister tubercles that had filled the body of the
workman. Into the baths of blue stain on his eternal strips
of glass Koch dipped them—and everywhere, in every one, he
found the same terrible curved sticks that had jumped into his
astounded gaze when he had stained the lung of the dead man.

“I have it!” he whispered, and called the busy Loeffler and
the faithful Gaffky from their own spyings on other microbes.
“Look!” Koch cried. “One little speck of tubercle I put into
this beast six weeks ago—there could not have been more
than a few hundred of those bacilli in that small bit—and
now they’ve grown into billions! What devils they are, those
germs—from that one place in the guinea-pig’s groin they have
sneaked everywhere into his body, they have gnawed—they
have grown through the walls of his arteries ... the blood
has carried them into his bones ... into the farthest corner
of his brain....”

Now he went to hospitals everywhere in Berlin, and begged
the bodies of men or women that had died of consumption, he
spent dreary days in dead houses and every evening before his
microscope in his laboratory where the stillness was broken
only by the eerie purrings and scurryings of guinea-pigs. He
injected the sick tissue from the wasted bodies of consumptives
who had died, into hundreds of guinea-pigs, into rabbits and
three dogs, thirteen scratching cats, ten flopping chickens and
twelve pigeons. He didn’t stop with these wholesale insane
inoculations but shot the same kind of deadly cheesy stuff
into white mice and rats and field mice and into two marmots.
Never in microbe hunting has there been such appalling thoroughness.

“Ach! this is a little hard on the nerves, this work,” he
muttered (thinking, perhaps of the lightning move of the paw
of one of his cats jabbing the germ-filled syringe needle into
his own hand). For Koch, hunting his invisible foes alone,
there were so many disagreeable and always imminent possibilities
of excitement—of something tragically worse than mere
excitement....

But the hand of this completely unheroic looking little microbe
hunter never slipped, it just grew drier and more
wrinkled and blacker from its incessant baths in the bichloride
of mercury—that good bichloride, with which in those old
days the groping microbe hunters used to swab down everything,
including their own persons. Then, week by week, in all
of Koch’s meaouwing, crowing, barking, clucking menagerie of
beasts those small curved bacilli grew into their relentless millions—and
one by one the animals died, and gave eighteen-hour-days
of work to Robert Koch in post-mortems and blear-eyed
peerings through the microscope.

“It is only when a man or beast has tuberculosis that I can
find these blue-stained rods, these bacilli,” Koch told Loeffler
and Gaffky. “In healthy animals—I have looked, you know,
at hundreds of them—I never find them.”

“That means, without doubt, that you have discovered the
bacillus that is the cause, Herr Doktor——”

“No—not yet—what I have done might make Pasteur sure,
but I am not at all convinced yet.... I have to get these
bacilli out of the bodies of my dying animals now ... grow
them on our beef-broth jelly, pure colonies of these microbes
I must get, and cultivate them for months, away from any
living creature ... and then, if I inoculate these cultivations
into good healthy animals, and they get tuberculosis ...” and
Koch’s sober wrinkled face smiled for a moment. Loeffler
and Gaffky, ashamed of their jumping at conclusions, went
back awed to their own searchings.

Testing every possible combination that his head could invent,
Koch set out to try to grow his bacilli pure on beef-broth
jelly. He made a dozen different kinds of good soup for them,
he kept his tubes and bottles at the temperature of the room
and the temperature of a man’s body and the temperature of
fever. He cleverly used the sick lungs of guinea-pigs that
teemed with bacilli, lungs that held no other stray microbes
which might over-grow and choke out those delicate germs
which he was sure must be the authors of consumption. The
stuff from these lungs he planted dangerously into hundreds
of tubes and bottles, but all this work ended in—nothing. In
brief, those slim bacilli that grew like weeds in tropic gardens
in the bodies of his sick animals, those microbes that swarmed
in millions in sick men, those bacilli turned up their noses—that
is, they would have if they had been equipped with noses—at
the good soups and jellies that Koch cooked for them.
It was no go!

But one day a reason for his failures popped into Koch’s
head: “The trouble is that these tubercle bacilli will only grow
in the bodies of living creatures—they are maybe almost complete
parasites—I must fix a food for them that is as near as
possible like the stuff a living animal’s body is made of!”

So it was that Koch invented his famous food—blood-serum
jelly—for microbes that are too finicky to grow on common
provender. He went to string-butchers and got the clear
straw-colored serum from the clotted blood of freshly slaughtered
healthy cattle and carefully heated this fluid to kill all
the stray microbes that might have fallen into it. Delicately
he poured this serum into each one of dozens of narrow test-tubes,
and placed these on a slant so that there would be a
long flat surface on which to smear the sick consumptive
tissues. Then ingeniously he heated each tube just hot enough
to make the serum set, on a slant, into a clear beautiful jelly.

That morning a guinea-pig, sadly riddled with tuberculosis,
had died. He dissected out of it a couple of the grayish yellow
tubercles, and then, with a wire of platinum he streaked
bits of this bacillus-swarming stuff on the moist surface of his
serum jelly, on tube after tube of it. Then, with that drawing in
and puffing out of breath that comes after a nasty piece of
work, well done, Koch took his tubes and put them in the oven—at
the exact temperature of a guinea-pig’s body.

Day after day Koch hurried in the morning to his incubating
oven, and took out his tubes and held them close to his
gold-rimmed glasses, and saw—nothing.

“Well, I have failed again,” he mumbled—it was the fourteenth
day after he had planted his consumptive stuff—“every
other microbe I have ever grown multiplies into large colonies
in a couple of days, but here, confound it—there is nothing,
nothing....”

Any other man would have pitched these barren disappointing
serum-tubes out, but at this stubbly-haired country doctor’s
shoulder his familiar demon whispered: “Wait—be patient,
my master—you know that tubercle germs sometimes
take months, years to kill men. Maybe too they grow very
slowly in the serum tubes.” So Koch did not pitch the tubes
out, and on the morning of the fifteenth day he came back to
his incubator—to find the velvety surface of the serum jelly
covered with tiny glistening specks! Koch reached a trembling
hand for his pocket lens, clapped it to his eye and peered
at one tube after another, and through his lens these glistening
specks swelled out into dry tiny scales....

In a daze Koch pulled the cotton plug out of one of his
tubes, mechanically he flamed its mouth in the sputtering blue
fire of the Bunsen burner, with a platinum wire he picked off
one of these little flaky colonies—they must be microbes—and
not knowing how or what, he got them before his microscope....

Then he knew that he had got to a warm inn on the stony
road of his adventure—here they were, countless myriads of
these same bacilli, these crooked rods that he had first spied
in the lung of the dead workman. They were motionless but
surely multiplying and alive—they were delicate and finicky
about their food and feeble in size, but more savage than
hordes of Huns and more murderous than ten thousand nests
of rattlesnakes.

Now Koch, in taut intent months, confirmed his first success—he
went after proving it with a patience and a detail
that made me sick of his everlasting thoroughness and prudence
as I read the endlessly multiplied experiments in his
classic report on tuberculosis—from consumptive monkeys
and consumptive oxen and consumptive guinea-pigs Koch grew
forty-three different families of these deadly rods on his slanted
tubes of serum jelly!

And only from animals sick or dying of tuberculosis, could
he grow them. For months he nursed these wee murderers
along, planting them from one tube to another—with marvelous
watchfulness he kept all other chance microbes away from
them.

“Now I must shoot these bacilli—these pure cultivations of
my bacilli—into healthy guinea-pigs, into all kinds of healthy
animals. If then these creatures get tuberculosis, I shall know
that my bacilli are necessarily and beyond all doubt the cause!”

That man with the terrible single-mindedness of a maniac
driven by a fixed idea changed his laboratory into the weirdest
kind of zoo. He became grouchy to every one—to curious
visitors he was a sarcastic, spiteful little German ogre. Alone
he sterilized batteries of shining syringes and shot the crinkly
masses of microbes from the cultivations in his serum-jelly
tubes—he injected these bacilli ground up in a little pure water
into guinea-pigs and rabbits and hens and rats and mice and
monkeys. “That’s not enough!” he growled, “I’ll try some
animals that never are known to have tuberculosis naturally.”
So he ranged abroad and gathered to his laboratory and injected
his beloved terrible bacilli into tortoises, sparrows, five frogs
and three eels.

Insanely Koch completed this most fantastic test by sticking
his microbes from the serum cultivation into—a goldfish!

Days dragged by, weeks passed, and every day Koch walked
into his workshop in the morning and made straight for the
cages and jars that held these momentous animals. The goldfish
continued to open and shut his mouth and swim placidly
about in his round-bellied bowl. The frogs croaked unconcernedly
and the eels kept all of their slippery liveliness; the tortoise
now and then stuck his head out of his shell and seemed
to wink an eye at Koch as if to say: “Your tubercle bugs are
food for me—give me some more.”

But while his injections worked no harm to these creatures,
that do not in the course of nature get consumption anyway—at
the same time the guinea-pigs began to droop, to lie pitifully
on their sides, gasping. One by one they died, their
bodies wasting terribly into tubercles....

Now Koch had forged the last link of the chain of his experiments
and was ready to give his news to the world: The
bacillus, the true cause of tuberculosis, has been trapped, discovered!
When suddenly he decided there was one more thing
to do.

“Human beings surely must catch these bacilli by inhaling
them, in dust, or from the coughing of people sick with consumption.
I wonder, will healthy animals be infected that
way too?” At once Koch began to devise ways of doing this
experiment—it was a nasty job. “I’ll have to spray the bacilli
from my cultivations at the animals,” he pondered. But this
was a more serious business than turning ten thousand murderers
out of jail....

Like the good hunter that he was, he took a chance with the
dangers that he couldn’t avoid. He built a big box and put
guinea-pigs and mice and rabbits inside it and set this box in
the garden. Then through the window he ran a lead pipe that
opened in a spray nozzle inside the box, and for three days,
for half an hour each day, he sat in his laboratory, pumping
at a pair of bellows that shot a poisonous mist of bacilli into
the box—to be breathed by the cavorting beasts inside it.

In ten days three of the rabbits were gasping, fighting for
that precious air that their sick lungs could no longer give
them. In twenty-five days the guinea-pigs had done their
humble work—one and all they were dead, of tuberculosis.

Koch told nothing of the ticklish job it was to take these
beasts out of their germ-soaked box—if I had been in his place
I would rather have handled a boxful of boa-constrictors—and
he makes no mention of how he disposed of this little
house whose walls had been wet with this so-deadly spray.
What chances for making heroic flourishes were missed by
this quiet Koch!