V

Until, one day, Koch—who frankly admitted it was by accident—looked
at the flat surface of half of a boiled potato left
on a table in his laboratory. “What’s this, I wonder?” he
muttered, as he stared at a curious collection of little colored
droplets scattered on the surface of the potato. “Here’s a
gray-colored drop, here’s a red one, there’s a yellow, a violet
one—these little specks must be made up of germs from the
air. I’ll have a look at them.”

He stuck his short-sighted eyes down close to the potato so
that his scraggly little beard almost dragged in it; he got ready
his thin plates of glass and polished off the lenses of his microscope.

With a slender wire of platinum he fished delicately into one
of the gray droplets and put a bit of its slimy stuff in a little
pure water between two bits of glass, under his microscope.
Here he saw a swarm of bacilli, swimming gently about, and
every one of these microbes looked exactly like his thousands
of brothers in this drop. Then Koch peered at the bugs from
a yellow droplet on the potato, and at those of a red one and
a violet one. The germs from one were round, from another
they had the appearance of swimming sticks, from a third
microbes looked like living corkscrews—but all the microbes
in one given drop were like their brothers, invariably!

Then in a flash Koch saw the beautiful experiment nature
had done for him. “Every one of these droplets is a pure
culture of one definite kind of microbe—a pure colony of one
species of germs.... How simple! When germs fall from
the air into the liquid soups we have been using—the different
kinds of them get all mixed up and swim among each
other.... But when different bugs fall from the air on the
solid surface of this potato—each one has to stay where it
falls ... it sticks there ... then it grows there, multiplies
into millions of its own kind ... absolutely pure!”

Koch called Loeffler and Gaffky, his two military doctor assistants,
and soberly he showed them the change in the whole
mixed-up business of microbe hunting that his chance glance at
an abandoned potato had brought. It was revolutionary! The
three of them set to work with an amazing—loyal Frenchmen
might call it stupid—German thoroughness to see if Koch was
right. There they sat before the three windows of their room,
Koch before his microscope on a high stool in the middle,
Loeffler and Gaffky on stools on his left hand and his right—a
kind of grimly toiling trinity. They tried to defeat their
hopes, but quickly they discovered that Koch’s prophecy was
an even more true one than he had dreamed. They made mixtures
of two or three kinds of germs, mixtures that could never
have been untangled by growing in flasks of soup; they
streaked these confused species of microbes on the cut flat
surfaces of boiled potatoes. And where each separate tiny
microbe landed, there it stuck, and grew into a colony of millions
of its own kind—and nothing but its own kind.

Now Koch, who, by this simple experience of the old potato,
had changed microbe hunting from a guessing game into something
that came near the sureness of a science—Koch, I say,
got ready to track down the tiny messengers that bring a dozen
murderous diseases to mankind. Up till this time Koch had
had very little criticism or opposition from other men of
science, mainly because he almost never opened his mouth until
he was sure of his results. He told of his discoveries with
a disarming modesty and his work was so unanswerably complete—he
had a way of seeing the objections that critics might
make and replying to them in advance—that it was hard to
find protestors.

Full of confidence Koch went to Professor Rudolph Virchow,
by far the most eminent German researcher in disease,
an incredible savant, who knew more than there was to be
known about a greater number of subjects than any sixteen
scientists together could possibly know. Virchow was, in brief,
the ultimate Pooh-Bah of German medical science. He had
spoken the very last word on clots in blood vessels and had
invented the impressive words, heteropopia, agenesia, and
ochronosis, and many others that I have been trying for years
to understand the meaning of. He had—with tremendous mistakenness—maintained
that consumption and scrofula were
two different diseases; but with his microscope he had made
genuinely good, even superb descriptions of the way sick tissues
look and he had turned his lens into every noisome nook and
cranny of twenty-six thousand dead bodies. Virchow had
printed—I do not exaggerate—thousands of scientific papers,
on every subject imaginable, from the shapes of little German
schoolboys’ heads and noses to the remarkably small size of
the blood vessels in the bodies of sickly green-faced girls.

Properly awed—as any one would be—Koch tiptoed respectfully
into this Presence.

“I have discovered a way to grow microbes pure, unmixed
with other germs, Herr Professor,” the bashful Koch told Virchow,
with deference.

“And how, I beg you tell me, can you do that? It looks to
me to be impossible.”

“By growing them on solid food—I can get beautiful isolated
colonies of one kind of microbe on the surface of a boiled potato....
And now I have invented a better way than
that ... I mix gelatin with beef broth ... and the gelatin
sets and makes a solid surface, and——”

But Virchow was not impressed. He made a sardonic remark
that it was so hard to keep different races of germs from
getting mixed up that Koch would have to have a separate
laboratory for each species of microbe.... In short, Virchow
was very sniffish and cold to Koch, for he had come to that
time of life when ageing men believe that everything is known
and there is nothing more to be found out. Koch went away
a bit depressed, but not one jot was he discouraged. Instead
of arguing and writing papers and making speeches against
Virchow he launched himself into the most exciting and superb
of all his microbe huntings—he set out to spy upon and discover
the most vicious of microbes, that mysterious marauder
which each year killed one man, woman, and child out of every
seven that died, in Europe, in America. Koch rolled up his
sleeves and wiped his gold-rimmed glasses and set out to hunt
down the microbe of tuberculosis.