III

Cool and stolid, Koch, now that he had come through these
perils, never thought himself a hero; he did not even think of
publishing his experiments! To-day it would be inconceivable
for a man to do such magnificent work and discover such momentous
secrets, and keep his mouth shut about it.

But Koch plugged on, and it is doubtful whether this hesitating,
entirely modest genius of a German country doctor
realized the beauty or the importance of his lonely experiments.

He plugged on. He must know more! He went pell-mell
at the inoculating of guinea-pigs and rabbits, and at last even
sheep, with the innocent looking but fatal fluid from the hanging-drops;
and in each one of these beasts, in the sheep just
as quickly and horribly as the mouse, the few thousands of
microbes on the splinter multiplied into billions in the animals,
in a few hours they teemed poisonously in what had been
robust tissues, choking the little veins and arteries with their
myriads, turning to a sinister black the red blood—so killing
the sheep, the guinea-pigs, and the rabbits.

At one fantastic jump Koch had soared out of the vast
anonymous rank and file of pill-rollers and landed among the
most original of the searchers, and the more ingeniously he
hunted microbes, the more miserably he tended to the important
duties of his practice. Babies in far-off farms howled, but
he did not come; peasants, with jumping aches in their teeth,
waited sullen hours for him—and at last he had to turn over
part of his practice to another doctor. Mrs. Koch saw little
of him and worried and wished he would not go on his calls
smelling of germicides and of his menagerie of animals. But
so far as he was concerned his suffering patients and his wife
might have been inhabitants of the other side of the moon—for
a new mysterious question was worrying at his head, tugging
at him, keeping him awake:

How, in nature, do these little weak anthrax bacilli that fade
away and die so easily on my slides, how do they get from sick
animals to healthy ones?

There were superstitions among the farmers and horse doctors
of Europe about this disease, strange beliefs in regard to
the mysterious power of this plague that hung always over
their flocks and herds like some cruel invisible sword. Why,
this disease is too terrible to be caused by such a wretched little
creature as a twenty-thousandth-of-an-inch-long bacillus!

“Your little germ may be what kills our herds, all right,
Herr Doktor,” the cattle men told Koch, “but how is it that
our cows or sheep can be all right in one pasture—perfectly
healthy, and then, when we take them into another field, with
fine grazing in it, they die like flies?”

Koch knew of this troublesome, mysterious fact too. He
knew that in Auvergne in France there were green mountains,
horrible mountains where no flock of sheep could go without
being picked off, one by one, or in dozens and even hundreds
by the black disease, anthrax. And in the country of the
Beauce there were fertile fields where sheep grew fat—only to
die of anthrax. The peasants shivered at night by their fires:
“Our fields are cursed,” they whispered.

These things bothered Koch—how could his tiny bacilli live
over winter, even for years, in the fields and on the mountains?
How could they, indeed, when he had smeared a little bacillus-swarming
spleen from a dead mouse on a clean slip of glass,
and watched the microbes grow dim, break up, and fade from
view? And when he put the nourishing watery fluid of ox-eyes
on these bits of glass, the bacilli would no longer grow;
when he washed the dried blood off and injected it into mice—these
little beasts continued to scamper gayly about in their
cages. The microbes, which two days before could have killed
a heavy cow, were dead!

“What keeps them alive in the fields, then,” muttered Koch,
“when they die on my clean glasses in two days?”

Then one day he ran on to a curious sight under his microscope—a
strange transformation of his microbes that gave him
a clew to his question; and Koch sat down on his stool in his
eight-by-ten laboratory in East Prussia and solved the mystery
of the cursed fields and mountains of France. He had
kept a hanging-drop, in its closed glass well, at the temperature
of a mouse’s body for twenty-four hours. “Ah, this ought
to be full of nice long threads of bacilli,” he muttered, and
looked down the tube of his microscope—“What’s this?” he
cried.

The outlines of the threads had grown dim, and each thread
was speckled, through its whole length, with little ovals that
shone brightly like infinitely tiny glass beads, and these beads
were arranged along the threads as perfectly as a string of
pearls.

To himself Koch muttered guttural curses. “Other microbes
have doubtless gotten into my hanging-drop,” he grumbled, but
when he looked very carefully he saw that wasn’t true, for the
shiny little beads were inside the threads—the bacilli that make
up the threads have turned into these beads! He dried this
hanging-drop, and put it away carefully, for a month or so,
and then as luck would have it, looked at it once more through
his lens. The strange strings of beads were still there, shining
as brightly as ever. Then an idea for an experiment got hold
of him—he took a drop of pure fresh watery fluid from the
eye of an ox. He placed it on the dried-up smear with its
months-old bacilli that had turned into beads. His head swam
with confused surprise as he looked, and watched the beads
grow back into the ordinary bacilli, and then into long threads
once more. It was outlandish!

“Those queer shiny beads have turned back into ordinary
anthrax bacilli again,” cried Koch, “the beads must be the
spores of the microbe—the tough form of them that can stand
great heat, and cold, and drying.... That must be the way
the anthrax microbe can keep itself alive in the fields for so
long—the bacilli must turn into spores....”

Then Koch launched himself into thorough, ingenious tests
to see if his quick guess was right. Expertly now he took
spleens out of mice which had perished of anthrax—he lifted
this deadly stuff out carefully with heated knives and forceps.
Protected from all chance of contamination by stray microbes
of the air, he kept the spleens for a day at the temperature of
a mouse’s body, and, sure enough, the microbes, every thread
of them, turned into glassy spores.

Then in experiments that kept him incessantly in his dirty
little room he found that the spores remained alive for months,
ready to hatch out into deadly bacilli the moment he put them
into a fresh drop of the watery fluid of ox-eyes, or the instant
he stuck them, on one of his thin slivers, into the root of a
mouse’s tail.

“These spores never form in an animal while he is still alive—they
only appear after he has died, and then only when he is
kept very warm,” said Koch, and he proved this beautifully by
clapping spleens into an ice chest—and in a few days this
stuff, smeared on splinters, was no more dangerous than if he
had shot so much beefsteak into his mice.

It was now the year 1876, and Koch was thirty-four years
old, and at last he emerged out of the bush of Wollstein, to
tell the world—stuttering a little—that it was at last proved
that microbes were the cause of disease. Koch put on his best
suit and his gold-rimmed spectacles and packed up his microscope,
a few hanging-drops in their glass cells, swarming with
murderous anthrax bacilli; and besides these things he bundled
a cage into the train with him, a cage that bounced a little with
several dozen healthy white mice. He took a train for Breslau
to exhibit his anthrax microbes and the way they kill mice, and
the weird way in which they turn into glassy spores—he
wanted to demonstrate these things to old Professor Cohn, the
botanist at the University, who had sometimes written him encouraging
letters.

Professor Cohn, who had been amazed at the marvelous experiments
about which the lonely Koch had written him, old
Cohn snickered when he thought of how this greenhorn doctor—who
had no idea, himself, of how original he was—would
surprise the highbrows of the University. He sent out invitations
to the most eminent medicoes of the school to come to
the first night of Koch’s show.