IV

And they came. To hear the unscientific backwoodsman—they
came. They came maybe out of friendliness to old Professor
Cohn. But Koch didn’t lecture—he was never much at
talking—instead of telling them that his microbes were the
true cause of anthrax, he showed these sophisticated professors.
For three days and nights he showed them, taking them in
swift steps through those searchings he had sweated at—groping
and failing often—for years. Never was there a greater
come-down for bigwigs who had arrived prepared to be indulgent
to a nobody. Koch never argued once, he never bubbled
and raved and made prophecies—but he slipped slivers into
mouse tails with an unearthly cleverness, and the experienced
professors of pathology opened their eyes to see him handle
his spores and bacilli and microscopes like a sixty-year-old
master. It was a knock-out!

At last Professor Cohnheim, one of the most skillful scientists
in the study of diseases in all of Europe, could hold himself
no longer. He rushed from the hall, hurried to his
own laboratory, and burst into the room where his young
student searchers were working. He shouted to them: “My
boys, drop everything and go see Doctor Koch—this man
has made a great discovery!” Cohnheim gasped to get his
breath.

“But who is this Koch, Herr Professor? We’ve never even
heard of him.”

“No matter who he is—it is a great discovery, so exact, so
simple. It is astounding! This Koch is not a professor,
even.... He hasn’t even been taught how to do research!
He’s done it all by himself, complete—there is nothing more
to do!”

“But what is this discovery, Herr Professor?”

“Go, I tell you, every one of you, and see for yourselves. It
is the most marvelous discovery in the realm of microbes ... he
will make us all ashamed of ourselves.... Go——” But
by this time, all of them, including Paul Ehrlich, had disappeared
through the door.

Seven years before, Pasteur had foretold: “It is within the
power of man to make parasitic maladies disappear from the
face of the earth....” And when he said these words the
wisest doctors in the world put their fingers to their heads,
thinking: “The poor fellow is cracked!”

But this night Robert Koch had shown the world the first
step toward the fulfillment of Pasteur’s seemingly insane vision:
“Tissues from animals dead of anthrax, whether they are fresh,
or putrid, or dried, or a year old, can only produce anthrax
when they contain bacilli or the spores of bacilli. Before this
fact all doubt must be laid aside that these bacilli are the cause
of anthrax,” he told them finally, as if his experiments had not
convinced them already. And he ended by telling his amazed
audience how to fight this terrible disease—how his experiments
showed a way to stamp it out in the end: “All animals
that die of anthrax must be destroyed at once after they die—or
if they can not be burned, they should be buried deep
in the ground, where the earth is so cold that the bacilli cannot
turn into the tough, long-lived spores....”

So it was that in these three days at Breslau this Koch put
a sword Excalibur into the hands of men, with which to begin
the fight against their enemies the microbes, their fight against
lurking death; so it was that he began to change the whole
business of doctors from a foolish hocus-pocus with pills and
leeches into an intelligent fight where science instead of superstition
was the weapon.

Koch fell among friends—among honest generous men—at
Breslau. Cohn and Cohnheim, instead of trying to steal his
stuff (there are no fewer shady fellows in science than in any
other human activity), these two professors immediately set
up a great whooping for Koch, an applause that echoed over
Europe and made Pasteur a bit uneasy for his job as Dean of
the Microbe Hunters. These two friends began to bombard
the authorities of the Imperial Health Office at Berlin about
this unknown that Germany ought to be proud of—they did
their best to give Koch a chance to do nothing but chase the
microbes of disease, to get away from that dull practice of his.

Left alone, or snubbed at Breslau, he might easily have gone
back to Wollstein to his business of telling people to stick out
their tongues. In short, men of science have either to be
showmen—as were the magnificent Spallanzani and the passionate
Pasteur—or they have to have impresarios.

Koch packed up Emmy and his household goods and moved
to Breslau and was given a job as city physician at four hundred
and fifty dollars a year, and was supposed to eke out his
living with the private patients that would undoubtedly flock
to be treated by such a brilliant man.

So thought Cohn and Cohnheim. But the doorbell of Koch’s
little office didn’t ring, hardly any one came to ring it, and so
Koch learned that it is a great disadvantage for a doctor to
be brainy and inquire into the final causes of things. He went
back to Wollstein, beaten, and here from 1878 to 1880 he
made long jumps ahead in microbe hunting once more—spying
on and tracking down the strange sub-visible beings that cause
the deadly infections of wounds in animals and in human beings.
He learned to stain all kinds of bacilli with different
colored dyes, so that the very tiniest microbe would stand out
clearly. In some unknown way he saved money enough to
buy a camera and stuck its lens against his microscope and
learned—no one helping him—how to take pictures of these
little creatures.

“You’ll never convince the world about these murderous
bugs until you can show them photographs,” Koch said. “Two
men can’t look through one microscope at the same time, no
two men will ever draw the same picture of a germ—so there’ll
always be wrangling and confusion.... But these photographs
can’t lie—and ten men can study them, and come to an
agreement on them....” So it was that Koch began to try
to introduce rime and reason into the baby science of microbe
hunting which up till now had been as much a wordy brawl as
a quest for knowledge.

Meanwhile his friends at Breslau had not forgotten him and
in 1880—it was like some bush-leaguer breaking into the big
team—he was told by the government to come to Berlin and
be Extraordinary Associate of the Imperial Health Office.
Here he was given a fine laboratory and a sudden undreamed-of
wealth of apparatus and two assistants and enough
money so that he could spend sixteen or eighteen hours of his
working day among his stains and tubes and chittering guinea-pigs.

By this time the news of Koch’s discoveries had spread to
all of the laboratories of Europe and had crossed the ocean
and inflamed the doctors of America. The vast exciting Battle
of the Germ Theory was on! Every medical man and
Professor of Diseases who knew—or thought he knew—the
top end from the bottom of a microscope set out to become
a microbe hunter. Every week brought glad news of the supposed
discovery of some new deadly microbe, surely the assassin
of suffering from cancer or typhoid fever or consumption.
One enthusiast would shout across continents that he
had discovered a kind of pan-germ that caused all diseases
from pneumonia to the pip—only to be forgotten for an idiot
who might claim that he had proved one disease, let us say
consumption, to be the result of the attack of a hundred different
species of microbes.

So great was the enthusiasm about germs—and the confusion—that
Koch’s discoveries were in danger of being
laughed into obscurity along with the vast magazines full of
balderdash that were being printed on the subject of the germ
theory.

And yet to-day we demand with a great hue and cry more
laboratories, more microbe hunters, better paid searchers to
free us from the diseases that scourge us. How futile! For
progress, God must send us a few more infernal marvelous
searchers of the kind of Robert Koch.

But in the midst of the danger that foolish enthusiasm
would kill the new science of microbe hunting, Koch kept his
head, and sat down to find a way to grow germs pure. “One
germ, one kind of germ only, causes one definite kind of disease—every
disease has its own specific microbe, I know that,”
said Koch—without knowing it. “I’ve got to find a sure easy
method of growing one species of germ away from all other
contaminating ones that are always threatening to sneak in!”

But how to cage one kind of microbe? All manner of weird
machines were being invented to try to keep different sorts of
germs apart. Several microbe hunters devised apparatus so
complicated that when they had finished building it they probably
had already forgotten what they set out to invent it for.
To keep stray germs of the air from falling into their bottles
some heroic searchers did their inoculations in an actual rain
of poisonous germicides!