II

Koch was spending his evenings fussing with his new microscope,
he was beginning to find out just the right amount of
light to shoot up into its lens with the reflecting mirror, he
was learning just how needful it was to have his thin glass
slides shining clean—those bits of glass on which he liked to
put drops of blood from the carcasses of sheep and cows, that
had died of anthrax....

Anthrax was a strange disease which was worrying farmers
all over Europe, that here and there ruined some prosperous
owner of a thousand sheep, that in another place sneaked in
and killed the cow—the one support—of a poor widow. There
was no rime or reason to the way this plague conducted its
maraudings; one day a fat lamb in a flock might be frisking
about, that evening this same lamb refused to eat, his head
drooped a little—and the next morning the farmer would find
him cold and stiff, his blood turned ghastly black. Then the
same thing would happen to another lamb, and a sheep, four
sheep, six sheep—there was no stopping it. And then the
farmer himself, and a shepherd, and a woolsorter, and a dealer
in hides might break out in horrible boils—or gasp out their
last breaths in a swift pneumonia.

Koch had started using his microscope with the more or
less thorough aimlessness of old Leeuwenhoek; he examined
everything under the sun, until he ran on to this blood of sheep
and cattle dead of anthrax. Then he began to concentrate, to
forget about making a call when he found a dead sheep in a
field—he haunted butcher shops to find out about the farms
where anthrax was killing the flocks. Koch hadn’t the leisure
of Leeuwenhoek; he had to snatch moments for his peerings,
between prescribing for some child that bawled with a bellyache
and the pulling out of a villager’s aching tooth. In these
interrupted hours he put drops of the blackened blood of a
cow dead of anthrax between two thin pieces of glass, very
clean shining bits of glass. He looked down the tube of his microscope
and among the wee round drifting greenish globules of
this blood he saw strange things that looked like little sticks.
Sometimes these sticks were short, there might be only a few
of them, floating, quivering a little, among the blood globules.
But here were others, hooked together without joints—many
of them ingeniously glued together till they appeared to him
like long threads a thousand times thinner than the finest silk.

“What are these things ... are they microbes ... are
they alive? They do not move ... maybe the sick blood of
these poor beasts just changes into these threads and rods,”
Koch pondered. Other men of science, Davaine and Rayer in
France, had seen these same things in the blood of dead sheep;
and they had announced that these rods were bacilli, living
germs, that they were undoubtedly the real cause of anthrax—but
they hadn’t proved it, and except for Pasteur, no one
in Europe believed them. But Koch was not particularly interested
in what anybody else thought about the threads and
rods in the blood of dead sheep and cattle—the doubts and
the laughter of doctors failed to disturb him, and the enthusiasms
of Pasteur did not for one moment make him jump at
conclusions. Luckily nobody anxious to develop young microbe
hunters had ever heard of Koch, he was a lone wolf
searcher—he was his own man, alone with the mysterious
tangled threads in the blood of the dead beasts.

“I do not see a way yet of finding out whether these little
sticks and threads are alive,” he meditated, “but there are
other things to learn about them....” Then, curiously, he
stopped studying diseased creatures and began fussing around
with perfectly healthy ones. He went down to the slaughter
houses and visited the string butchers and hobnobbed with
the meat merchants of Wollstein, and got bits of blood from
tens, dozens, fifties of healthy beasts that had been slaughtered
for meat. He stole a little more time from his tooth-pullings
and professional layings-on-of-hands. More and more Mrs.
Koch worried at his not tending to his practice. He bent over
his microscope, hours on end, watching the drops of healthy
blood.

“Those threads and rods are never found in the blood of
any healthy animal,” Koch pondered, “—this is all very well,
but it doesn’t tell me whether they are bacilli, whether they are
alive ... it doesn’t show me that they grow, breed, multiply....”

But how to find this out? Consumptives—whom, alas, he
could not help—babies choking with diphtheria, old ladies who
imagined they were sick, all his cares of a good physician began
to be shoved away into one corner of his head. How-to-prove-these-wee-sticks-are-alive,
this question made him forget
to sign his name to prescriptions, it made him a morose
husband, it made him call the carpenter in to put up a partition
in his doctor’s office. And behind this wall Koch stayed
more and more hours, with his microscope and drops of black
blood of sheep mysteriously dead—and with a growing number
of cages full of scampering white mice.

“I haven’t the money to buy sheep and cows for my experiments,”
you can hear him muttering, while some impatient
invalid shuffled her feet in the waiting room, “besides, cows
would be a little inconvenient to have around my office—but
maybe I can give anthrax to these mice ... maybe in them I
can prove that the sticks really grow....”

So this foiled globe-trotter started on his strange explorations.
To me Koch is a still more weird and uncanny microbe
hunter than Leeuwenhoek, certainly he was just as much of
a self-made scientist. Koch was poor, he had his nose on the
grindstone of a medical practice, all the science he knew was
what a common medical course had taught him—and from
this, God knows, he had learned nothing whatever about the
art of doing experiments; he had no apparatus but Emmy’s
birthday present, that beloved microscope—everything else he
had to invent and fashion out of bits of wood and strings and
sealing wax. Worst of all, when he came into the living room
from his mice and microscope to tell Frau Koch about the new
strange things he had discovered, this good lady wrinkled up
her nose and told him:

“But, Robert, you smell so!”

Then he hit upon a sure way to give mice the fatal disease
of anthrax. He hadn’t a convenient syringe with which to shoot
the poisonous blood into them, but after sundry cursings and
the ruin of a number of perfectly good mice, he took slivers
of wood, cleaned them carefully, heated them in an oven to
kill any chance ordinary microbes that might be sticking to
them. These slivers he dipped into drops of blood from sheep
dead of anthrax, blood filled with the mysterious, motionless
threads and rods, and then—heaven knows how he managed
to hold his wiggling mouse—he made a little cut with a clean
knife at the root of the tail of the mouse, and into this cut he
delicately slid the blood-soaked splinter. He dropped this
mouse into a separate cage and washed his hands and went off
in a kind of conscientious wool-gathering way to see what was
wrong with a sick baby.... “Will that beast, that mouse
die of anthrax.... Your child will be able to go back to
school next week, Frau Schmidt.... I hope I didn’t get any
of that anthrax blood into that cut on my finger....” Such
was Koch’s life.

And next morning Koch came into his home-made laboratory—to
find the mouse on its back, stiff, its formerly sleek
fur standing on end and its whiteness of yesterday turned into
a leaden blue, its legs sticking up in the air. He heated his
knives, fastened the poor dead creature onto a board, dissected
it, opened it down to its liver and lights, peered into every
corner of its carcass. “Yes, this looks like the inside of an
anthrax sheep ... see the spleen, how big, how black it
is ... it almost fills the creature’s body....” Swiftly he
cut with a clean heated knife into this swollen spleen and put
a drop of the blackish ooze from it before his lens....

At last he muttered: “They’re here, these sticks and threads
... they are swarming in the body of this mouse, exactly as
they were in the drop of dead sheep’s blood that I dipped
the little sliver in yesterday.” Delighted, Koch knew that
he had caused in the mouse, so cheap to buy, so easy to handle,
the sickness of sheep and cows and men. Then for a month
his life became a monotony of one dead mouse after another,
as, day after day, he took a drop of the blood or the spleen of
one dead beast, put it carefully on a clean splinter, and slid
this sliver into a cut at the root of the tail of a new healthy
mouse. Each time, next morning, Koch came into his laboratory
to find the new animal had died, of anthrax, and each time
in the blood of the dead beast his lens showed him myriads of
those sticks and tangled threads—those motionless, twenty-five-thousandth-of-an-inch
thick filaments that he could never
discover in the blood of any healthy animal.

“These threads must be alive,” Koch pondered, “the sliver
that I put into the mouse has a drop of blood on it and that
drop holds only a few hundreds of those sticks—and these have
grown into billions in the short twenty-four hours in which
the beast became sick and died.... But, confound it, I must
see these rods grow—and I can’t look inside a live mouse!”

How—shall—I—find—a—way—to—see—the—rods—grow—out—into—threads?
This question pounded at him while he
counted pulses and looked at his patients’ tongues. In the
evenings he hurried through supper and growled good-night to
Mrs. Koch and shut himself up in his little room that smelled
of mice and disinfectant, and tried to find ways to grow his
threads outside a mouse’s body. At this time Koch knew
little or nothing about the yeast soups and flasks of Pasteur,
and the experiments he fussed with had the crude originality
of the first cave man trying to make fire.

“I will try to make these threads multiply in something that
is as near as possible like the stuff an animal’s body is made
of—it must be just like living stuff,” Koch muttered, and he
put a wee pin-point piece of spleen from a dead mouse—spleen
that was packed with the tangled threads, into a little drop of
the watery liquid from the eye of an ox. “That ought to be
good food for them,” he grumbled. “But maybe, too, the
threads have got to have the temperature of a mouse’s body
to grow,” he said, and he built with his own hands a clumsy
incubator, heated by an oil lamp. In this uncertain machine
he deposited the two flat pieces of glass between which he had
put the drop of liquid from the ox-eye. Then, in the middle
of the night, after he had gone to bed, but not to sleep, he
got up to turn the wick of his smoky incubator lamp down
a little, and instead of going back to rest, again and again he
slid the thin strips of glass with their imprisoned infinitely
little sticks before his microscope. Sometimes he thought he
could see them growing—but he could not be sure, because
other microbes, swimming and cavorting ones, had an abominable
way of getting in between these strips of glass, over-growing,
choking out the slender dangerous rods of anthrax.

“I must grow my rods pure, absolutely pure, without any
other microbes around,” he muttered. And he kept flounderingly
trying ways to do this, and his perplexity pushed up
huge wrinkles over the bridge of his nose, and built crow’s-feet
round his eyes....

Then one day a perfectly easy, a foolishly simple way to
watch his rods grow flashed into Koch’s head. “I’ll put them
in a hanging-drop, where no other bugs can get in among
them,” he muttered. On a flat, clear piece of glass, very thin,
which he had heated thoroughly to destroy all chance microbes,
Koch placed a drop of the watery fluid of an eye from a just-butchered
healthy ox; into this drop he delicately inserted the
wee-est fragment of spleen, fresh out of a mouse that had a
moment before died miserably of anthrax. Over the drop he
put a thick oblong piece of glass with a concave well scooped
out of it so that the drop would not be touched. Around this
well he had smeared some vaseline to make the thin glass stick
to the thick one. Then, dextrously, he turned this simple apparatus
upside down, and presto!—here was his hanging-drop,
his ox-eye fluid with its rod-swarming spleen, imprisoned
in the well—away from all other microbes.

  

Koch did not know it, perhaps, but this—apart from that
day when Leeuwenhoek first saw little animals in rain water—was
a most important moment in microbe hunting, and in
the fight of mankind against death.

“Nothing can get into that drop—only the rods are there—now
we’ll see if they will grow,” whispered Koch as he slid his
hanging-drop under the lens of his microscope; in a kind of
stolid excitement he pulled up his chair and sat down to watch
what would happen. In the gray circle of the field of his lens
he could see only a few shreddy lumps of mouse spleen—they
looked microscopically enormous—and here and there a very
tiny rod floated among these shreds. He looked—fifty minutes
out of each hour for two hours he looked, and nothing
happened. But then a weird business began among the shreds
of diseased spleen, an unearthly moving picture, a drama that
made shivers shoot up and down his back.

The little drifting rods had begun to grow! Here were two
where one had been before. There was one slowly stretching
itself out into a tangled endless thread, pushing its snaky way
across the whole diameter of the field of the lens—in a couple
of hours the dead small chunks of spleen were completely hidden
by the myriads of rods, the masses of thread that were
like a hopelessly tangled ball of colorless yarn, living yarn—silent
murderous yarn.

“Now I know that these rods are alive,” breathed Koch.
“Now I see the way they grow into millions in my poor little
mice—in the sheep, in the cows even. One of these rods, these
bacilli—he is a billion times smaller than an ox—just one of
them maybe gets into an ox, and he doesn’t bear any grudge
against the ox, he doesn’t hate him, but he grows, this bacillus,
into millions, everywhere through the big animal, swarming
in his lungs and brain, choking his blood-vessels—it is terrible.”

Time, his office and its dull duties, his waiting and complaining
patients—all of these things became nonsense, seemed
of no account, were unreal to Koch whose head was now full
of nothing but dreadful pictures of the tangled skeins of the
anthrax threads. Then each day of a nervous experiment that
lasted eight days Koch repeated his miracle of making a million
bacilli grow where only a few were before. He planted
a wee bit of his rod-swarming hanging-drop into a fresh, pure
drop of the watery fluid of an ox-eye and in every one of these
new drops the few rods grew into myriads.

“I have grown these bacilli for eight generations away from
any animal, I have grown them pure, apart from any other
microbe—there is no part of the dead mouse’s spleen, no diseased
tissue left in this eighth hanging-drop—only the children
of the bacilli that killed the mouse are in it.... Will
these bacilli still grow in a mouse, or in a sheep, if I inject
them—are these threads really the cause of anthrax?”

Carefully Koch smeared a wee bit of his hanging-drop that
swarmed with the microbes of the eighth generation—this drop
was murky, even to his naked eye, with countless bacilli—he
smeared a part of this drop on to a little splinter of wood.
Then, with that guardian angel who cares for daring stumbling
imprudent searchers of nature standing by him, Koch deftly
slid this splinter under the skin of a healthy mouse.

The next day Koch was bending near-sightedly over the
body of this little creature pinned on his dissecting board;
giddy with hope, he was carefully flaming his knives.... Not
three minutes later Koch is seated before his microscope,
a bit of the dead creature’s spleen between two thin bits of
glass. “I’ve proved it,” he whispers, “here are the threads,
the rods—those little bacilli from my hanging-drop were just
as murderous as the ones right out of the spleen of a dead
sheep.”

So it was that Koch found in this last mouse exactly the
same kind of microbe that he had spied long before—having
no idea it was alive—in the blood of the first dead cow he had
peered at when his hands were fumbling and his microscope
was new. It was precisely the same kind of bacillus that he
had nursed so carefully, through long successions of mice,
through I do not know how many hanging-drops.

First of all searchers, of all men that ever lived, ahead of
the prophet Pasteur who blazed the trail for him, Koch had
really made sure that one certain kind of microbe causes one
definite kind of disease, that miserably small bacilli may be
the assassins of formidable animals. He had angled for these
impossibly tiny fish, and spied on them without knowing anything
at all of their habits, their lurking places, of how hardy
they might be or how vicious, of how easy it might be for them
to leap upon him from the perfect ambush their invisibility
gave them.