VI

But here stood Louis Pasteur, while his twenty-four immune
sheep scampered about among the carcasses of the same
number of pitiful dead ones, here stood this man, I say, in a
gruesomely gorgeous stage-setting of an immortal drama, and
all the world was there to see and to record and to be converted
to his own faith in his passionate fight against needless death.

Now the experiment turned into the likeness of a revival.
Doctor Biot, a healer in horses who had been one of the most
sarcastic of the Pasteur-baiters, rushed up to him as the last
of the not-vaccinated sheep was dying, and cried: “Inoculate
me with your vaccines, Mr. Pasteur—just as you have done
to those sheep you have saved so wonderfully——Then I
will submit to the injection of the murderous virus! All men
must be convinced of this marvelous discovery!”

“It is true,” said another humbled enemy, “that I have made
jokes about microbes, but I am a repentant sinner!”

“Well, allow me to remind you of the words of the Gospel,”
Pasteur answered him. “Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner
that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons
that need no repentance.”

The great de Blowitz cheered and rushed off to file his telegram
to the London Times  and to the newspapers of the world:
“The experiment at Pouilly-le-Fort is a perfect, an unprecedented
success.”

The world received this news and waited, confusedly believing
that Pasteur was a kind of Messiah who was going to
lift from men the burden of all suffering. France went wild
and called him her greatest son and conferred on him the Grand
Cordon of the Legion of Honor. Agricultural societies, horse
doctors, poor farmers whose fields were cursed with the poisonous
virus of anthrax—all these sent telegrams begging him
for thousands of doses of the life-saving vaccine. And Pasteur,
with Roux and Chamberland and Thuillier, responded
to them with a magnificent disregard of their own health—and
of science. For Pasteur, poet that he was, had more faith than
the wildest of his new converts in this experiment.

In answer to these telegrams Pasteur turned the little laboratory
in the Rue d’Ulm into a vaccine factory—huge kettles
bubbled and simmered with the broth in which the tame, the
life-saving, anthrax bacilli were to grow. Delicately—but so
frantically that it was not quite delicate enough—Roux and
Chamberland worked at weakening the murderous bacilli just
enough to make the sheep of France a little sick, but not too
sick from anthrax. Then all of them sweat at pouring
numerous gallons of this bacillus-swarming soup which was the
vaccine, into little bottles, a few ounces to each bottle, into
clean bottles that had to be absolutely free from all other
germs. And they had to do this subtle job without any proper
apparatus whatever. I marvel that Pasteur ever attempted it;
surely there never has been such blind confidence raised by
one clear—but Lord! it might be simply a lucky—experiment.

In moments snatched from this making of vaccine Roux and
Chamberland and Thuillier scurried up and down the land of
France, and even to Hungary. They inoculated two hundred
sheep in this place and five hundred and seventy-six in that—in
less than a year hundreds of thousands of beasts had got
this life-saving stuff. These wandering vaccinators would drag
themselves back into the laboratory from their hard trips,
they would get back to Paris probably wanting to get a few
drinks or spend an evening with a pretty girl or loaf over a
pipe—but Pasteur could not stand the smell of tobacco smoke,
and as for wine and women, were not the sheep of France
literally baa-ing to be saved? So these young men who were
slaves of this battler whose one insane thought was “find-the-microbe-kill-the-microbe”—these
faithful fellows took off their
coats and peered at anthrax bacilli through the microscopes
until their eye rims got red and their eyelashes fell out. In
the middle of this work—with the farmers of France yelling
for more vaccine—they began to have strange troubles: contaminating
germs that had no business there began to pop up
among the anthrax bacilli; all at once a weak vaccine that
should have just killed a mouse began to knock off large rabbits....
Then, just as the scientific desperadoes got these
messes straightened out, Pasteur would come in, nagging at
them, fuming, fussing because they took so long at their experiments.

He wanted to try to find the deadly virus of hydrophobia.

And now at night the chittering of the guinea-pigs and the
scurrying fights of the buck-rabbits in their cages were
drowned by the eerie noise of mad dogs howling—sinister
howls that kept Roux and Chamberland and Thuillier from
sleep.... What would Pasteur ever have done—he surely
would never have got far in his fight with the messengers of
death—without those fellows Roux and Chamberland and
Thuillier?

Gradually, it was hardly a year after the miracle of Pouilly-le-Fort,
it began to be evident that Pasteur, though a most
original microbe hunter, was not an infallible God. Disturbing
letters began to pile up on his desk; complaints from Montpothier
and a dozen towns of France, and from Packisch and
Kapuvar in Hungary. Sheep were dying from anthrax—not
natural anthrax they had picked up in dangerous fields, but
anthrax they had got from those vaccines that were meant to
save them! From other places came sinister stories of how
the vaccine had failed to work—the vaccine had been paid for,
whole flocks of sheep had been injected, the farmers had gone
to bed breathing Thank-God-For-Our-Great-Man-Pasteur, only
to wake up in the morning to find their fields littered with the
carcasses of dead sheep, and these sheep—which ought to
have been immune—had died from the lurking anthrax spores
that lay in their fields....

Pasteur began to hate to open his letters; he wanted to stop
his ears against snickers that sounded from around corners,
and then—the worst thing that could possibly happen—came
a cold terribly exact scientific report from the laboratory of
that nasty little German Koch in Berlin, and this report ripped
the practicalness of the anthrax vaccine to tatters. Pasteur
knew that Koch was the most accurate microbe hunter in the
world.

There is no doubt that Pasteur lost some sleep from this
aftermath of his glorious discovery, but, God rest him, he was
a gallant man. It was not in him to admit, either to the public
or to himself, that his sweeping claims were wrong.

“Have not I said that my vaccines made sheep a little sick
with anthrax, but never killed them, and protected them perfectly?
Well, I must stick to that,” you can hear him mutter
between his teeth.

  
  
      VACCINATING SHEEP FOR ANTHRAX

  

What a searcher this Pasteur was, and yet how little of that
fine selfless candor of Socrates or Rabelais is to be found in
him. But he is not in any way to be blamed for that, for
those two last were only, in their way, looking for truth, while
Pasteur’s work carried him more and more into the frantic
business of saving lives, and in this matter truth is not of the
first importance....

In 1882, while his desk was loaded with reports of disasters,
Pasteur went to Geneva, and there before the cream of disease-fighters
of the world he gave a thrilling speech, subject:
“How to guard living creatures from virulent maladies by
injecting them with weakened microbes.” Pasteur assured
them that: “The general principles have been found and one
cannot refuse to believe that the future is rich with the greatest
hopes.”

“We are all animated with a superior passion, the passion
for progress and for truth!” he shouted—but unhappily he
said no word about those numerous occasions when his vaccine
had killed sheep instead of protecting them.

At this meeting Robert Koch sat blinking at Pasteur behind
his gold-rimmed spectacles and smiling under his weedy beard
at such an unscientific inspirational address. Pasteur seemed
to feel something hanging over him, and he challenged Koch
to argue with him publicly—knowing that Koch was a much
better microbe hunter than an argufier. “I will content myself
with replying to Mr. Pasteur’s address in a written paper,
in the near future,” said Koch—who coughed, and sat down.

In a little while this reply appeared. It was dreadful. In
this serio-comic answer Dr. Koch began by remarking that he
had obtained some of this precious so-called anthrax vaccine
from the agent of Mr. Pasteur.

Did Mr. Pasteur say that his first vaccine would kill mice,
but not guinea-pigs? Dr. Koch had tested it, and it wouldn’t
even kill mice. But some queer samples of it killed sheep!

Did Mr. Pasteur maintain that his second vaccine killed
guinea-pigs but not rabbits? Dr. Koch had carefully tested
this one too, and found that it often killed rabbits very
promptly—and sometimes sheep, poor beasts! which Mr. Pasteur
claimed it would guard from death.

Did Mr. Pasteur really believe that his vaccines were really
pure cultivations containing nothing but anthrax microbes?
Dr. Koch had studied them carefully and found them to be
veritable menageries of hideous scum-forming bacilli and
strange cocci and other foreign creatures that had no business
there.

Finally, was Mr. Pasteur really burning so with a passion
for truth? Then why hadn’t he told of the bad results as well
as the good ones, that had followed the wholesale use of his
vaccine?

“Such goings-on are perhaps suitable for the advertising of
a business house, but science should reject them vigorously,”
finished Koch, drily, devastatingly.

Then Pasteur went through the roof and answered Koch’s
cool facts in an amazing paper with arguments that would not
have fooled the jury of a country debating society. Did Koch
dare to make believe that Pasteur’s vaccines were full of contaminating
microbes? “For twenty years before Koch’s
scientific birth in 1876, it has been my one occupation to isolate
and grow microbes in a pure state, and therefore Koch’s
insinuation that I do not know how to make pure cultivations
cannot be taken seriously!” shouted Pasteur.

The French nation, even the great men of the nation, patriotically
refused to believe that Koch had demoted their hero
from the rank of God of Science—what could you expect from
a German anyway?—and they promptly elected Pasteur to the
Académie Française, the ultimate honor to bestow on a Frenchman.
And on the day of Pasteur’s admission this fiery yes-man
was welcomed to his place among the Immortal Forty by the
skeptical genius, Ernest Renan, the author who had changed
Jesus from a God into a good human being, a man who could
forgive everything because he understood everything. Renan
knew that even if Pasteur sometimes did suppress the truth,
he was still sufficiently marvelous. Renan was not a scientist
but he was wise enough to know that Pasteur had done a wonderful
thing when he showed that weak bugs may protect living
beings against virulent ones—even if they would not do
it one hundred times out of one hundred.

Regard these two fantastically opposite men facing each
other on this solemn day. Pasteur the go-getter, an energetic
fighter full of a mixture of faiths that interfered, sometimes,
with ultimate—and maybe ugly—truth. And talking to him
loftily sits the untroubled Renan with the massiveness of
Mount Everest, such a dreadful skeptic that he probably was
never quite convinced that he was himself alive, so firmly doubting
the value of doing anything that he had become one of the
fattest men in France.

Renan called Pasteur a genius and compared him to some
of the greatest men that ever lived and then gave the excited,
paralyzed, gray-haired, microbe hunter this mild admonition:

“Truth, Sir, is a great coquette; she will not be sought with
too much passion, but often is most amenable to indifference.
She escapes when apparently caught, but gives herself up if
patiently waited for; revealing herself after farewells have
been said, but inexorable when loved with too much fervor.”

Surely Renan was too wise to think that his lovely words
would ever change Pasteur one jot from the headlong untruthful
hunter after truth that he was. But just the same, these
words sum up the fundamental sadness of Pasteur’s life, they
tell of the crown of thorns that madmen wear whose dream it
is to change a world in the little seventy years they are allowed
to live.