III

A lesser man than Pasteur might have done this same accidental
experiment—for this was no test planned by the human
brain—a lesser man might have done it and would have spent
years trying to explain to himself the mystery of it, but Pasteur,
stumbling on this chance protection of a couple of miserable
chickens, saw at once a new way of guarding living
things against virulent germs, of saving men from death. His
brain jumped to a new way of tricking the hitherto inexorable
God who ruled that men must be helpless before the sneaking
attacks of his sub-visible enemies....

Pasteur was fifty-eight years old now, he was past his prime,
but with this chance discovery of the vaccine that saved
chickens from cholera, he started the six most hectic years of
his life, years of appalling arguments and unhoped-for triumphs
and terrible disappointments—into these years, in short,
he poured the energy and the events of the lives of a hundred
ordinary men.

Hurriedly Pasteur and Roux and Chamberland set out to
confirm the first chance observation they had made. They
let virulent chicken cholera microbes grow old in their bottles
of broth; they inoculated these enfeebled bugs into dozens of
healthy chickens—which promptly got sick, but as quickly
recovered. Then triumphantly, a few days later, they watched
these birds—these vaccinated chickens—tolerate murderous injections
of millions of microbes, enough to kill a dozen new
birds who were not immune.

So it was that Pasteur, ingeniously, turned microbes against
themselves. He tamed them first, and then he strangely used
them for wonderful protective weapons against the assaults
of their own kind.

And now Pasteur, with his characteristic impetuousness—after
all it was only chickens he had learned to guard from
death so far—became more arrogant than ever with the old-fashioned
doctors who talked Latin words and wrote shot-gun
prescriptions. He went to a meeting of the Academy of Medicine
and with complaisance told the doctors how his chicken
vaccinations were a great advance on the immortal smallpox
discovery of Jenner: “In this case I have demonstrated a
thing that Jenner never could do in smallpox—and that is,
that the microbe that kills is the same one that guards the
animal from death!”

The old-fashioned blue-coated doctors were peeved at Pasteur’s
appointing himself a god superior to the great Jenner;
Doctor Jules Guérin, the famous surgeon, became particularly
sarcastic about Pasteur making so much of mere fussings
with chickens—and the fight was on. Pasteur, in a fury got up
and shouted remarks about the utter nonsensicality of one of
Guérin’s pet operations, and there occurred a most scandalous
scene—it embarrasses me to have to tell about it—a strange
shambles in which Guérin, who was past eighty, rose from his
seat and was about to fall on the sixty-year-old Pasteur. The
old man aimed a wallop at Pasteur, but frantic friends jumped
in and prevented the impending fisticuffs of these two men
who thought they could settle the truth by kicks and blows
and mayhem.

Next day the ancient Guérin sent his seconds to Pasteur
with a challenge to a duel, but Pasteur, evidently, did not care
to risk dying that way and he sent Guérin’s friends to the Secretary
of the Academy with this message: “I am ready, having
no right to act otherwise, to modify whatever the editors may
consider as going beyond the rights of criticism and legitimate
defense.” And so Pasteur once more proved himself to be a
human being—if not what is commonly called a man—by
backing out of the fight.

As I have told you before, Pasteur had a great deal of the
mystic in him. Often he bowed himself down before that mysterious
Infinite—he worshiped the Infinite when he was not
clutching at it like a baby reaching for the moon; but frequently,
the moment one of his beautiful experiments had
knocked another little chunk off that surrounding Unknown,
he made the mistake of believing that all mysteries had dissolved
away. It was so now—when he saw that he could
really protect chickens perfectly against a fatal illness by his
amazing trick of sticking a few of their own tamed assassins
into them. At once Pasteur guessed: “Maybe these fowl-cholera
microbes will guard chickens against other virulent
diseases!” and promptly he inoculated some hens with his new
vaccine of weakened fowl-cholera germs and then injected
them with some certainly murderous anthrax bacilli—and the
chickens did not die!

Wildly excited he wrote to Dumas, his old professor, and
hinted that the new fowl-cholera vaccine might be a wonderful
Pan-Protector against all kinds of virulent maladies. “If
this is confirmed,” he wrote, “we can hope for the most important
consequences, even in human maladies.”

Old Dumas, greatly thrilled, had this letter published in the
Reports of the Academy of Sciences, and there it stands, a sad
monument to Pasteur’s impetuousness, a blot on his record
of reporting nothing but facts. So far as I can find, Pasteur
never retracted this error, although he soon found that a vaccine
made from one kind of bacillus does not protect an animal
against all diseases, but only—and then not absolutely
surely—against the one disease of which the microbe in the
vaccine is the cause.

But one of Pasteur’s most charming traits was his characteristic
of a scientific Phœnix, who rose triumphantly from the
ashes of his own mistakes. When his imagination carried him
into the clouds you find him presently landing on the ground
with a bump—making clever experiments again, digging for
good true hard facts. So it is not surprising to find him, with
Roux and Chamberland, in 1881, discovering a very pretty
way of taming vicious anthrax microbes and turning them into
a vaccine. By this time the quest after vaccines had become
so violent that Roux and Chamberland hardly had their Sundays
off, and never went on vacations; they slept at the laboratory
to be near their tubes and microscopes and microbes.
And here, Pasteur directing them, they delicately weakened
anthrax bacilli so that some killed guinea-pigs, but not rabbits,
and others did mice to death, but were too weak to harm
guinea-pigs. They shot the weaker and then the stronger microbes
into sheep, who got a little sick but then recovered, and
after that these sheep could stand, apparently, the assaults of
vicious anthrax germs that were able to kill even a cow.

At once Pasteur told this new triumph to the Academy of
Sciences—he had left off going to the Academy of Medicine
after his brawl with Guérin—and he held out purple hopes to
them that he would presently invent ingenious vaccines that
would wipe out all diseases from mumps to malaria. “What is
more easy,” he shouted, “than to find in these successive
viruses a vaccine capable of making sheep and cows and horses
a little sick with anthrax without letting them perish—and so
preserving them from subsequent maladies?” Some of Pasteur’s
colleagues thought he was a little cocksure about this,
and they ventured to protest. Pasteur’s veins stood out on
his forehead, but he managed to keep his mouth shut until he
and Roux were on the way home, when he burst out, speaking
really of all people who failed to see the absolute truth of his
idea:

“I would not be surprised if such a man were to be caught
beating his wife!”

Make no mistake—science was no cool collecting of facts
for Pasteur; in him it set going the same kind of machinery
that stirs the human animal to tears at the death of a baby
and makes him sing when he hears his uncle has died and left
him five hundred thousand dollars.

But enemies were on Pasteur’s trail again. Just as he was
always stepping on the toes of physicians, so he had offended
the high and useful profession of the horse doctors, and one
of the leading horse doctors, the editor of one of the most important
journals of horse doctoring, his name was Doctor
Rossignol, cooked up a plot to lure Pasteur into a dangerous
public experiment and so destroy him. This Rossignol got up
with a great show of scientific fairness at the Agricultural Society
of Melun and said:

“Pasteur claims that nothing is easier than to make a vaccine
that will protect sheep and cows absolutely from anthrax.
If that is true, it would be a great thing for French farmers,
who are now losing twenty million francs a year from this
disease. Well, if Pasteur can really make such magic stuff,
he ought to be willing to prove to us that he has the goods.
Let us get Pasteur to consent to a grand public experiment; if
he is right, we farmers and veterinarians are the gainers—if
it fails, Pasteur will have to stop his eternal blabbing about
great discoveries that save sheep and worms and babies and
hippopotamuses!” Like this argued the sly Rossignol.

At once the Society raised a lot of francs to buy forty-eight
sheep and two goats and several cows and the distinguished
old Baron de la Rochette was sent to flatter Pasteur into this
dangerous experiment.

But Pasteur was not one bit suspicious. “Of course I am
willing to demonstrate to your society that my vaccine is a
life-saver—what will work in the laboratory on fourteen sheep
will work on sixty at Melun!”

That was the great thing about Pasteur! When he prepared
to take the rabbit out of the hat, to astonish the world, he was
absolutely sincere about it; he was a magnificent showman and
not below some small occasional hocus-pocus, but he was no
designing mountebank. And the public test was set for May
and June, that year.

Roux and Chamberland—who had begun to see animals that
were strange combinations of chickens and guinea-pigs in their
dreams, to drop important flasks, to lie awake injecting millions
of imaginary guinea-pigs, these fagged-out boys had just
started off on a vacation to the country—when they received
telegrams that brought them back to their exciting treadmill:

COME BACK PARIS AT ONCE ABOUT TO MAKE
PUBLIC DEMONSTRATION THAT OUR VACCINE
WILL PROTECT SHEEP AGAINST ANTHRAX—L. PASTEUR.

Something like that read these wires.

They hurried back. Pasteur said to them: “Before the
Agricultural Society of Melun, at the farm of Pouilly-le-Fort, I
am going to vaccinate twenty-four sheep, one goat and several
cattle—twenty-four other sheep, one goat and several
other cattle are going to be left without inoculation—then, at
the appointed time, I am going to inject all of the beasts with
the most deadly virulent culture of anthrax bacilli that we
have. The vaccinated animals will be perfectly protected—the
not-vaccinated ones will die in two days of course.” Pasteur
sounded as confident as an astronomer predicting an
eclipse of the sun....

“But, master, you know this work is so delicate—we cannot
be absolutely sure of our vaccines—they may kill some of the
sheep we try to protect——”

“WHAT WORKED WITH FOURTEEN SHEEP IN OUR
LABORATORY WILL WORK WITH FIFTY AT MELUN!”
Pasteur roared at them. For him just then, there
was no such thing as a mysterious, tricky nature, an unknown
full of failures and surprises—the misty Infinite was as simple
as two plus two makes four to him just then. So there was
nothing for Roux and Chamberland to do but to roll up their
sleeves and get the vaccines ready.

The day for the first injections came at last. Their bottles
and syringes were ready, their flasks were carefully labeled—“Be
sure not to mix up the first and second vaccine, boys!”
shouted Pasteur, full of a gay confidence, as they left the Rue
d’Ulm for the train. As they came on the field at Pouilly-le-Fort,
and strode toward the sheds that held the forty-eight
sheep, two goats and several cattle, Pasteur marched into the
arena like a matador, and bowed severely to the crowd. There
were senators of the Republic there, and scientists and horse
doctors and dignitaries, and hundreds of farmers; and as Pasteur
walked among them with his little limp—it was however
a sort of jaunty limp—they cheered him mightily, many of
them, and some of them snickered.

And there was a flock of newspaper men there, including the
now almost legendary de Blowitz, of the London Times .

The sheep, fine healthy beasts, were herded into a clear
space; Roux and Chamberland lighted their alcohol lamps
and gingerly unpacked their glass syringes and shot five drops
of the first vaccine—the anthrax bacilli that would kill mice
but leave guinea-pigs alive, into the thighs of twenty-four of
the sheep, one of the goats, and half of the cattle. The beasts
got up and shook themselves and were labeled by a little gouge
punched out of their ears. Then the audience repaired to a
shed where Pasteur harangued them for half an hour—telling
them simply but with a kind of dramatic portentousness of
these new vaccinations and the hopes they held out for suffering
men.

Twelve days went by and the show was repeated. The
crowd was there once more and the second vaccine—the
stronger one whose bacilli had the power of killing guinea-pigs
but not rabbits—was injected, and the animals bore up beautifully
under it and scampered about as healthy sheep, goats
and cattle should do. The time for the fatal final test drew
near; the very air of the little laboratory became finicky;
the taut workers snapped at each other across the Bunsen
flames. Pasteur was never so appallingly quiet—and the bottle
washers fairly jumped across the room to fill his growled orders.
Every day Thuillier, Pasteur’s new youngest assistant,
went out to the farm to put his thermometer carefully under
the tails of the inoculated animals to see if they had fever—but
thank God, every one of them was standing up beautifully
under the heavy dose of the vaccine that was not quite murderous
enough to kill rabbits.

While the heads of Roux and Chamberland turned several
hairs grayer, Pasteur kept his confidence, and he wrote, with
his old charmingly candid opinion of himself: “If success is
complete, this will be one of the finest examples of applied
science in this country, consecrating one of the greatest and
most fruitful discoveries.”

His friends shook their heads and lifted their shoulders and
murmured: “Napoleonic, my dear Pasteur,” and Pasteur did
not deny it.