III

But away in Berlin there toiled another Émile—the Germans
leave off the last “e”—Emil August Behring. He worked
in Koch’s laboratory, in the dilapidated building called the
“Triangel” in the Schumann street. Here great things were
stirring. Koch was there, no longer plain Doctor Koch of
Wollstein, but now a Herr Professor, an eminent Privy Councilor.
But his hat still fitted him; he peered through his
spectacles, saying little; he was enormously respected, and
against his own judgment he was trying to convince himself
he had discovered a cure for tuberculosis. The authorities
(scientists have reason occasionally to curse all authorities no
matter how benevolent) were putting pressure on him. At
least so it is whispered now by veteran microbe hunters who
were there and remember those brave times.

“We have showered you with medals and microscopes and
guinea-pigs—take a chance now, and give us a big cure, for the
glory of the Fatherland, as Pasteur has done for the glory of
France!” It was ominous stuff like this Koch was always
hearing. He listened at last, and who can blame him, for
what man can remain at his proper business of finding out the
ways of microbes with Governments bawling for a place in the
sun—or with mothers calling? So Koch listened and prepared
his own disaster by telling the world about his “Tuberculin.”
But at the same time he guided his youngsters in fine
jobs they were doing—and among these young men was Emil
August Behring. How Koch pointed the gun of his cold marvelous
criticism at that poet’s searchings!

And what a house of microbe hunters it was, that dingy Triangel!
Its walls shook under the arguments and guttural cries
and incessant experiments of Koch’s young men. Paul Ehrlich
was there, smoking myriads of cigars, smearing his clothes
and his hands and even his face with a prismatic array of
dyes, making bold experiments to find out how baby mice
inherit immunity to certain vegetable poisons from their
mothers.... Kitasato, the round-faced Japanese, was shooting
lock-jaw bacilli into the tails of mice and solemnly amputating
these infected tails—to see whether the creatures
would perish from the poisons the microbes had made while
the tails were still attached.... And there were many others
there, some forgotten and some whose names are now famous.
With a vengeance the Germans were setting out to beat the
French, to bury them under a vast confusion of experiments,
to save mankind first.

But particularly, Emil Behring was there. He was a little
over thirty; he was an army doctor; he had a little beard,
neater than Koch’s scraggly one, but with less signs of originality.
Just the same Behring’s head, in spite of that prosaic
beard, was the head of a poet; and yet, though he was fond
of rhetoric, no one stuck closer to his laboratory bench than
Behring. He compared the grandeur of the Master’s discovery
of the tubercle bacillus to the rosy tip of the snow-capped peak
of his favorite mountain in Switzerland, while he probed by
careful experiments into why animals are immune to microbes.
He compared the stormy course of human pneumonia to the
rushing of a mountain stream, while he discovered a something
in the blood of rats—this stuff would kill anthrax bacilli!
He had two scientific obsessions, which were also poetical:
one was that blood is the most marvelous of the juices circulating
in living things (what an extraordinary mysterious sap
it was, this blood!)—the other was the strange notion (not a
new one) that there must exist chemicals to wipe invading microbes
out of animals and men—without hurting the men or
the animals.

“I will find a chemical to cure diphtheria!” he cried, and
inoculated herds of guinea-pigs with cultivations of virulent
diphtheria bacilli. They got sick, and as they got sicker he
shot various chemical compounds into them. He tried costly
salts of gold, he tried naphthylamine, he tested more than
thirty different strange or common substances. He believed
innocently because these things could kill microbes in a glass
tube without damaging the tube, they would also hit the diphtheria
bacilli under a guinea-pig’s hide without ruining the
guinea-pig. But alas, from the slaughter house of dead and
dying guinea-pigs his laboratory was, you would suppose he
would have seen there was little to choose between the deadly
microbes and his equally murderous cures.... Nevertheless,
being a poet, Behring did not have too great a reverence for
facts; the hecatombs of corpses went on piling up, but they
failed to shake his faith in some marvelous unknown remedy
for diphtheria hidden somewhere among the endless rows of
chemicals in existence. Then, in his enthusiastic—but random—search
he came upon the tri-chloride of iodine.

Under the skins of several guinea-pigs he shot a dose of
diphtheria bacilli sure to kill them. In a few hours these microbes
began their work; the spot of the injection became
swollen, got ominously hot, the beasts began to droop—then,
six hours after the fatal dose of the bacilli, Behring shot in
his iodine tri-chloride.... “It is no good, once more,” he
muttered. The day passed with no improvement and the next
morning the beasts began to go into collapses. Solemnly he
put the guinea-pigs on their backs, then poked them with his
finger to see if they could still scramble back on their feet....
“If the guinea-pig can still get up when you poke him, there
may be yet a chance for him,” explained Behring to his amazed
assistants. What a test that was—think of a doctor having a
test like this to see whether or no his patient would live!
And what an abominably crude test! Less and less the iodine-treated
guinea-pigs moved when he poked them—there was
now no longer any hope....

Then one morning Behring came into his laboratory to see
those guinea-pigs on their feet! Staggering about, and dreadfully
scraggly looking beasts they were, but they were getting
better from diphtheria, these creatures whose untreated companions
had died days before....

“I have cured diphtheria!” whispered Behring.

In a fever he went at trying to cure more guinea-pigs with
this iodine stuff; sometimes the diphtheria bacilli killed these
poor beasts; sometimes the cure killed them; once in a while
one or two of them survived and crawled painfully back to
their feet. There was little certainty of this horrible cure and
no rime or reason. The guinea-pigs who survived, probably
wished they were dead, for while the tri-chloride was curing
them it was burning nasty holes in their hides too—they
squeaked pitifully when they bumped these gaping sores. It
was an appalling business!

Just the same, here were a few guinea-pigs, sure—except for
this iodine—to have died of diphtheria; and they were alive!
I often ponder how terrible was the urge forcing men like
Behring to try to cure disease—they were not searchers for
truth, but rabid, experimenting healers rather; ready to kill an
animal or even a child maybe with one disease to cure him of
another. They stopped at nothing.... For, with no evidence
save these few dilapidated guinea-pigs, with no other proof of
the virtues of this blistering iodine tri-chloride, Behring proceeded
to try it on babies sick with diphtheria.

And he reported: “I have not been encouraged by certain
carefully instituted tests of iodine tri-chloride on children sick
with diphtheria....”

But here were still some of those feeble but cured guinea-pigs,
and Behring clutched at some good his murderous gropings
might do. The gods were kind to him. He pondered, and
at last he asked himself: “Will these cured animals be immune
to diphtheria now?” He took these creatures and shot
an enormous dose of diphtheria bacilli into them. They stood
it! They never turned a hair at millions of bacilli, enough to
kill a dozen ordinary animals. They were immune!

Now Behring no longer trusted chemicals (think of the
beasts that had gone down to the incinerator!) but he still
had his fixed notion that blood was the most marvelous of the
saps coursing through living things. He worshiped blood;
his imagination gave it unheard-of excellences and strange
virtues. So—with more or less discomfort to his decrepit
cured guinea-pigs—he sucked a little blood with a syringe out
of an artery in their necks; he let the tubes holding this blood
stand until clear straw-colored serum rose over the red part
of the blood. With care he drew this serum off with a tiny
pipet—he mixed the serum with a quantity of virulent diphtheria
bacilli: “Surely there is something in the blood of these
creatures to make them so immune to diphtheria,” pondered
Behring; “undoubtedly there is something in this serum to kill
the diphtheria microbes....”

He expected to see the germs shrivel up, to watch them die,
but when he looked, through his microscope, he saw dancing
masses of them—they were multiplying, “exuberantly multiplying,”
he wrote in his notes with regret. But blood is wonderful
stuff. Some way it must be at the bottom of his guinea-pigs’
immunity. “After all,” muttered Behring, “this Frenchman,
Roux, has proved it isn’t the diphtheria germ but the
poison it makes—it is the poison kills animals, and children....
Maybe these iodine-cured guinea-pigs are immune
to the poison too!”

He tried it. With sundry guttural gruntings, with a certain
poetic sloppiness, Behring got ready a soup which held poison
but had been freed of microbes. Huge doses of this stuff he
pumped from a syringe under the hides of his decreasing number
of desolate cured guinea-pigs. Again, they were immune!
Their sores went on healing, they grew fat. The poison
bothered them no more than had the bacilli which made it.
Here was something entirely new in microbe hunting, something
Roux maybe dreamed of but couldn’t make come true.
Pasteur had guarded sheep against anthrax, and children from
the bites of mad dogs, but here was something incredible—Behring,
giving guinea-pigs diphtheria and then nearly killing
them with his frightful cure, had made them proof against the
microbe’s murderous toxin. He had made them immune to
the stuff of which one ounce was enough to kill seventy-five
thousand big dogs....

“Surely it is in the blood I will find this antidote which protects
the creatures!” cried Behring.

He must get some of their blood. There were hardly any
of the battered but diphtheria-proof guinea-pigs left now, but
he must have blood! He took one of the veterans, and cut
into its neck to find the artery; there was no artery left—his
numerous blood lettings had obliterated it. He poked about
(let us honor this animal!) and finally got a driblet of blood
out of a vessel in its leg. What a nervous time it was for
Behring, and I do not know whether it is Behring or his beasts
who is most to be pitied, for every morning he came down to
the laboratory wondering whether any of his priceless animals
were left alive.... But he had a few drops of serum now,
from a cured guinea-pig. He mixed this, in a glass tube, with
a large amount of the poisonous soup in which the diphtheria
microbes had grown.

Into new, non-immune guinea-pigs went this mixture—and
they did not die!

“How true are the words of Goethe!” cried Behring. “Blood
is an entirely wonderful sap!”

Then, with Koch the master blinking at him, and with the
entire small band of maniacs in the laboratory breathless for
the result, Behring made his famous critical experiment. He
mixed diphtheria poison with the serum of a healthy guinea-pig
who was not immune, who had never had diphtheria or
been cured from it either, and this serum did not hinder one
bit the murderous action of the poison. He shot this mixture
into new guinea-pigs; in three days they grew cold; when he
laid them on their backs and poked them with his finger they
did not budge. In a few hours they had coughed their last
sad hiccup and passed beyond....

“It is only the serum of immune animals—of beasts who
have had diphtheria and have been cured of it—it is only such
serum kills the diphtheria poison!” cried Behring. Healer that
he was, you can hear him muttering: “Now, maybe, I can make
larger animals immune too, and get big batches of their poison-killing
serum, then I’ll try that on children with diphtheria
... what saves guinea-pigs should cure babies!”

By this time nothing could discourage Behring. Like some
victorious general swept on by the momentum of his first
bloody success, he began shooting diphtheria microbes, and
iodine tri-chloride, and the poison of diphtheria microbes, into
rabbits, into sheep, into dogs. He tried to turn their living
bodies into factories for making the healing serum, the toxin-killing
serum. “Antitoxin” he called such serum. And he
succeeded, after those maimings and holocausts and mistakes,
always the necessary preludes to his triumphs. In a little
while he had sheep powerfully immune, and from them he got
plenty of blood. “Surely the antitoxin [he hadn’t the faintest
notion what the chemistry of this mysterious stuff was]
certainly it will prevent diphtheria,” said Behring.

He injected little doses of the sheep serum into guinea-pigs;
the next day he pumped virulent diphtheria bacilli into these
same beasts. It was marvelous to watch them. There they
were, scampering about with never a sign of sickness, while
their companions (who had got no protecting dose of serum)
perished miserably in a couple of days. How good it was to
see them die, those unguarded beasts! For it was these creatures
told him how well the serum saved the other ones. Hundreds
of pretty experiments of this kind Behring made (there
was little sloppiness now) and his helpers maybe pointed to
their foreheads, asking whether their chief would ever have
done saving one set of guinea-pigs and killing another set to
prove he had saved the first. But Behring had reasons. “We
made so many experiments because we wanted to show Herr
Koch how far we had come in our immunizing of laboratory
animals,” he wrote in one of his early reports.

There was only one fly in the ointment of his success—the
guarding action of the antitoxin serum didn’t last long. For
a few days after guinea-pigs had got their injections of serum
they stood big doses of the poison, but presently, in a week
or two weeks, it took less and less of the toxin to kill them.
Behring pulled at his beard: “This isn’t practical,” he muttered,
“you couldn’t go around giving all the children of Germany
a shot of sheep serum every few weeks!” And alas, his
eagerness for something to make the authorities wide-eyed,
led him away from his fine fussings with a way to prevent
diphtheria—it sent him a-whoring after the pound of cure....

“Iodine tri-chloride is almost as bad for guinea-pigs as the
microbes are—but this antitoxin serum, it doesn’t give them
sores and ulcers.... I know it won’t hurt my animals....
I know it kills poison ... now, if it would cure!”

Carefully he shot fatal doses of diphtheria bacilli into a lot
of guinea-pigs. Next day, they were seedy. The second day
their breath came anxiously. They stayed on their backs
with that fatal laziness.... Then Behring took half of this
lot of dying beasts, and into their bellies he injected a good
heavy dose of the antitoxin from his immune sheep. Miracles!
Nearly every one of them (but not all) began to breathe
more easily in a little while. Next day, when he put them on
their backs, they hopped nimbly back to their feet. They
stayed there. By the fourth day they were as good as new,
while their untreated companions, cold, dead, were being carried
out by the animal boy.... The serum cured!

The old laboratory of the Triangel was in a furor now, over
this triumphant finish of Behring’s sloppy stumbling Odyssey.
The hopes of everybody were purple—surely now he would
save children! While he was getting ready his serum for the
first fateful test on some baby near to death with diphtheria,
Behring sat down to write his classic report on how he could
cure beasts sure to die, by shooting into them a new, an unbelievable
stuff their brother beasts had made in their own
bodies—at the risk of nearly dying themselves. “We have no
certain recipe for making animals immune,” wrote Behring;
“these experiments I have recorded do not include only my
successes.” Surely they did not, for Behring set down the
messings and the fiascoes along with the few lucky stabs that
gave him his sanguinary victory.... How could this pottering
poet have pulled off the discovery of the diphtheria antitoxin?
But then, come to think of it, those first ancient nameless
men who invented sails to carry swift boats across the
water—they must have groped that way too.... How many
of the crazy craft of those anonymous geniuses turned turtle?
It is the way discoveries are made....

Toward the end of the year 1891, babies lay dying of diphtheria
in the Bergmann clinic in the Brick Street in Berlin. On
the night of Christmas, a child desperately sick with diphtheria
cried and kicked a little as the needle of the first syringe
full of antitoxin slid under its tender skin.

The results seemed miraculous. A few children died; the
little son of a famous physician of Berlin passed out mysteriously
a few minutes after the serum went into him and there
was a great hullabaloo about that—but presently large chemical
factories in Germany took up the making of the antitoxin
in herds of sheep. Within three years twenty thousand babies
had been injected and like a rumor spread the news, and Biggs,
the eminent American Health Officer, then in Europe, was
carried away by the excitement. He cabled dramatically and
authoritatively to Dr. Park in New York:

DIPHTHERIA ANTITOXIN IS A SUCCESS; BEGIN
TO PRODUCE IT.

In the excitement of this cure, those sad ones, who had lost
dear ones through the first enthusiasm about the dangerous injections
of the consumption cure of Koch, forgot their sorrow
and forgave Koch because of his brilliant pupil Behring.