II

Four years later Loeffler’s words came true—by what seemed
an utterly silly, but what was surely a most fantastical experiment
you would have thought could only result in drowning a
guinea-pig. What a hectic microbe hunting went on in Paris
just then! Pasteur, in a state of collapse after his triumph
of the dog bite vaccine, was feebly superintending the building
of his million-franc Institute in the Rue Dutot. The wild,
half-charlatan Metchnikoff had come out of Odessa in Russia
to belch quaint theories about how phagocytes gobble up malignant
germs. Pasteurians were packing microscopes in
satchels and hurrying to Saigon in Indo-China and to Australia
to try to discover microbes of weird diseases that did not exist.
Hopefully frantic women were burying Pasteur—he was too
tired!—under letters begging him to save their children from
a dozen horrid diseases.

“If you will,” one woman wrote him, “you can surely find a
remedy for the horrible disease called diphtheria. Our children,
to whom we teach your name as a great benefactor, will
owe their lives to you!”

Pasteur was absolutely done up, but Roux—and he was
helped by the intrepid Yersin who afterward brilliantly discovered
the germ of the black death—set out to try to find a way
to wipe diphtheria from the earth. It wasn’t a science—it was
a crusade, this business. It was full of passion, of purpose; it
lacked skillful lying-in-wait, and those long planned artistic
ambushes you find in most discoveries. I will not say Émile
Roux began his searching because of this pitiful note from that
woman—but there is no doubt he worked to save rather than
to know. From the old palsied master down to the most obscure
bottle wiper, the men of this house in the Rue Dutot were
humanitarians; they were saviors—and that is noble!—but
this drove them sometimes into strange byways far off the
road where you find truth.... And in spite of this Roux
made a marvelous discovery.

Roux and Yersin went to the Hospital for Sick Children—diphtheria
was playing hell with Paris—and here they ran on
to the same bacillus Loeffler had found. They grew this microbe
in flasks of broth, and did the regular accepted thing
first, shooting great quantities of this soup into an assorted
menagerie of unfortunate birds and quadrupeds who had to die
without the satisfaction of knowing they were martyrs. It
wasn’t particularly enlightened searching, this, but almost from
the tap of the gong, they stumbled on one of the proofs Loeffler
had failed to find. Their diphtheria soup paralyzed rabbits!
The stuff went into their veins; in a few days the delighted
experimenters watched these beasts drag their hind
legs limply after them; the palsy crept up their bodies to their
front legs and shoulders—they died in a clammy, dreadful
paralysis....

“It hits rabbits just the way it does children,” muttered
Roux, full of a will to believe——“This bacillus must be the
true cause of diphtheria.... I shall find the germ in these
rabbits’ bodies now!” And he clawed tissues out of a dozen
corners of their carcasses; he made cultivations of their spleens
and hearts—but never a bacillus! Only a few days before he
had pumped a billion or so into them, each of them. Here they
were, drawn and quartered, carved up and searched from their
pink noses to the white under-side of their tails. And not a
bacillus. What had killed them then?

Then Loeffler’s prediction flashed over Roux: “It must be
the germs make a poison, in this broth, to paralyze and kill
these beasts ...” he pondered.

For a while the searcher came uppermost in him. He forgot
about possible savings of babies; he concentrated on vast
butcheries of guinea-pigs and rabbits—he must prove that the
diphtheria germ drips a toxin out of its wee body.... Together
with Yersin he began a good unscientific fumbling at
experiments; they were in the dark; there were no precedents
nor any kind of knowledge to go by. No microbe hunter before
them had ever separated a deadly poison (though Pasteur
had once made something of a try at it) from the bodies of
microbes. They were alone in the dark, Roux and Yersin—but
they lighted matches.... “The bacilli must pour out a
poison into the broth we grow them in—just as they pour it
from their membrane in a child’s throat into his blood!” Of
course that last was not proved.

Then Roux stopped arguing in a circle. He searched. He
worked with his hands. It was worse, this fumbling of his,
than trying to get a stalled motor to go when you know nothing
about internal combustion machinery. He took big glass
bottles and put pure microbeless soup into them, and sowed
pure cultivations of the diphtheria bacillus in this broth; into
the incubating oven went the large-bellied bottles——“Now
we will try separating the germs from the soup in which they
grow,” said Roux, after the bottle had ripened for four days.
They rigged up a strange apparatus—it was a filter, shaped like
a candle, only it was hollow, and made of fine porcelain that
would let the soup through, but so tight-meshed that it would
hold the tiniest bacilli back. With tongue-protruding care to
keep themselves from being splashed with this deadly stuff,
they poured the microbe-teeming broth around the candles
held rigid in shiny glass cylinders. They fussed—maybe, or
at least I hope so, with the blessed relief of profanity—but
the broth wouldn’t run through the porcelain. But at last they
pushed it through with high air pressure—and finally they
breathed easy, arranging little flasks full of a clear, amber-colored
filtered fluid (it had never a germ in it) on their laboratory
bench.

“This stuff should have the poison in it ... the filter has
held back all the microbes—but this stuff should kill our animals,”
muttered Roux. The laboratory buzzed with eager
animal-boys getting ready the rabbits and guinea-pigs. Into
the bellies of these beasts went the golden juice propelled from
the syringe by Roux’s deft hands....

He became a murderer in his heart, this Émile Roux, and in
his head as he came down to the laboratory each morning
were half-mad wishes for the death of his beasts. “The stuff
should be hitting them by now,” you can hear him growling
to Yersin, but they looked in vain for the ruffled hair, the
dragging hind legs, the cold shivering bodies to tell them their
wish was coming true.

It was beastly! All of this fussing with the delicate filter
experiments—and the animals munched at the greens in their
cages, they hopped about, males sniffed at females and engaged
in those absurd scufflings with other males which guinea-pigs
and rabbits hold to be necessary to the propagation of
their kind.... Let these giants (who fed them well) inject
more of this stuff into their veins, their bellies—poison?
Imagination! It made them feel happy....

Roux tried again. He shot bigger doses of his filtered soup
into the animals, other animals, still more animals. It was no
go, there was no poison.

That is, for a merely sensible man there would have been
no poison in the filtered soup that had stood in the incubator
for four days. Hadn’t enough animals been wasted trying
it? But Roux (let all mothers and children and the gods caring
for insane searchers bless him!) was no reasonable man
just then. For a moment he had caught Pasteur’s madness,
his strange trick of knowing what all men thought wrong to be
right, his flair for good impossible experiments. “There is a
poison there!” you can hear that hawk-faced consumptive
Roux shout to himself, to the dusty, bottle-loaded shelves of
his laboratory, to the guinea-pigs who would have snickered—if
they could have—at his earnest futile efforts to murder
them. “There must be a poison in this soup where the diphtheria
germs have grown—else why should those rabbits have
died?”

Then—I have told scientific searchers about this and they
have held their noses at such an experiment—Roux nearly
drowned a guinea-pig. For weeks he had been injecting more
and more of his filtered soup, but now (it was like facing a
night on a park bench with your last dime on the two dice) he
injected thirty times as much! Not even Pasteur would have
risked such an outlandish dose—thirty-five cubic centimeters
Roux shot under the guinea-pig’s skin and you would expect
that much water would kill such a little beast. If he died it
would mean nothing.... But into the belly of a guinea-pig
and into the ear-vein of a rabbit went this ocean of filtered
juice—it was as if he had put a bucketful of it into the veins
of a middle-sized man.

But that was the way Roux carved his name on those tablets
which men while they are on earth must never allow to
crumble; for, though the rabbit and the guinea-pig stood the
mere bulk of the microbe-less broth very well, and appeared
perfectly chipper for a day or so afterwards, in forty-eight
hours their hair was on end, their breath began to come in
little hiccups. In five days they were dead, with exactly those
symptoms their brothers had, after injections of the living
diphtheria bacilli. So it was that Émile Roux discovered the
diphtheria poison....

By itself this weird experiment of the gigantic dose of
feebly poisonous soup would only have made microbe hunters
laugh. It was scandalous. “What!—if a great flask of diphtheria
microbes can make so little poison that it takes a good
part of a bottle of it to kill a small guinea-pig—how can a few
microbes in a child’s throat make enough to do that child to
death? It is idiotic!”

But Roux had got his start. With this silly experiment as
an uncertain flashlight, he went tripping and stumbling through
the thickets, he bent his sallow bearded face (sometimes it was
like the face of some unearthly bird of prey) over a precise
long series of tests. Then suddenly he was out in the open.
Presently, it was not more than two months later, he hit on the
reason his poison had been so weak before—he simply hadn’t
left his germ-filled bottles in the incubator for long enough;
there hadn’t been time enough for them really to get down to
work to make their deadly stuff. So, instead of four days, he
left the microbes stewing at body temperature in their soup
for forty-two days, and when he ran that brew through the
filter—presto! With bright eyes he watched unbelievably tiny
amounts of it do dreadful things to his animals—he couldn’t
seem to cut down the dose to an amount small enough to keep
it from doing sad damage to his guinea-pigs. Exultant he
watched feeble drops of it do away with rabbits, murder sheep,
lay large dogs low. He played with this fatal fluid; he dried
it; he tried to get at the chemistry of it (but failed); he got
out a very concentrated essence of it though, and weighed it,
and made long calculations.

One ounce of that purified stuff was enough to kill six hundred
thousand guinea-pigs—or seventy-five thousand large
dogs! And the bodies of those guinea-pigs who had got a six
hundred thousandth of an ounce of this pure toxin—the tissues
of those bodies looked like the sad tissues of a baby dead of
diphtheria....

So it was Roux made Loeffler’s prophecy come true; it was
that way he discovered the fluid messenger of death which
trickles from the insignificant bodies of diphtheria bacilli. But
he stuck here; he had explained how a diphtheria germ murders
babies but he had found no way to stop its maraudings.
There was that letter from the mother—but Roux’s researches
petered out into various directions to doctors how to grow
germs pure out of children’s throats at the bedside, and into
suggestions for useful gargles.... He hadn’t Pasteur’s tremendous
grim stick-to-itiveness, nor his resourceful brain.