IV

Then Metchnikoff went to see if this same battle took place
in frogs and rabbits, and suddenly, in 1886, the Russian people
were thrilled by Pasteur’s saving of sixteen of their folk from
the bite of the mad wolf. The good people of Odessa and the
farmers of the Zemstvo round about gave thanks to God, hurrahs
for Pasteur, and a mighty purse of roubles for a laboratory
to be started at once in Odessa. And Metchnikoff was appointed
Scientific Director of the new Institute—for had not this man
(they forgot for a moment he was Jewish) studied in all the
Universities of Europe, and had he not lectured learnedly to
the doctors of Odessa, telling about the phagocytes of the
blood, which gobble microbes?

“Who knows?” you can hear the people saying. “Maybe in
our new Institute, Professor Metchnikoff can train these little
phagocytes to gobble up all microbes?”

Metchnikoff accepted the position, but told the authorities,
shrewdly: “I am only a theoretician; I am overwhelmed with
researches—some one else will have to be trained to make
vaccines, to do the practical work.”

Nobody in Odessa knew anything about microbe hunting
then, so Metchnikoff’s friend, Doctor Gamaléia, was sent to
the Pasteur Institute in Paris posthaste. The citizens were
anxious to begin to be prevented from having diseases; they
bawled for vaccines. So Gamaléia, after a little while in Paris,
where he watched Roux and Pasteur and learned a great deal
from them, but not quite enough—this Gamaléia came back
and started to make anthrax vaccines for the sheep of the
Zemstvo, and rabies vaccines for the people of the town.
“All should now go very well!” cried Metchnikoff (he knew
nothing of the nasty tricks virulent microbes can play) and
he retired to his theoretical fastnesses to grapple with rabbits
and dogs and monkeys, to see if their phagocytes would swallow
the microbes of consumption and relapsing fever and
erysipelas. Scientific papers vomited from his laboratory, and
the searchers of Europe began to be excited by the discoveries
of this strange genius in the south of Russia. But he began
to have troubles with his theory, for dogs and rabbits and
monkeys—alas—are not transparent, like water fleas....

Then the shambles began. Gamaléia and the other members
of Metchnikoff’s practical staff began to fight among
themselves and mix up vaccines; microbes spilled out of tubes;
the doctors of the town—naturally a little jealous of this new
form of healing—started to snoop into the laboratory, to ask
embarrassing questions, to start whispers going through the
town: “Who is this Professor Metchnikoff—he hasn’t even a
doctor’s certificate. He is only a naturalist, a mere bug-hunter—how
can he know anything about preventing diseases?”

“Where are those cures?” demanded the people. “Give us
our preventions!” shouted the farmers—who had gone down
into their socks for good roubles. Metchnikoff came out of
the fog of his theory of phagocytes for a moment, and tried to
satisfy them by sowing chicken cholera bacilli among the
meadow mice which were eating up the crops. But, alas, a
lying, inflammatory report appeared in the daily paper, screaming
that this Metchnikoff was sowing death—that chicken
cholera could change into human cholera....

“I am overwhelmed with my researches,” muttered Metchnikoff.
“I am a theoretician—my researches need a peaceful
shelter in which to be developed....” So he asked for a
vacation, got it, packed his bag, and went to the Congress of
Vienna to tell everybody about phagocytes, and to look for a
quiet place in which to work. He must get away from that
dreadful need to prove that his theories were true by dishing
out cures to impatient authorities and peasants who insisted
on getting their money’s worth out of research. From Vienna
he went to Paris to the Pasteur Institute, and there a great
triumph and surprise waited for him. He was introduced to
Pasteur, and at once Metchnikoff exploded into tremendous
explanations of his theory of phagocytes. He made a veritable
movie of the battle between the wandering cells and
microbes....

The old captain of the microbe hunters looked at Metchnikoff
out of tired gray eyes that now and then sparkled a little:
“I at once placed myself on your side, Professor Metchnikoff,”
said Pasteur, “for I have been struck by the struggle between
the divers microörganisms which I have had occasion to observe.
I believe you are on the right road.”

Although the struggles Pasteur mentioned had nothing to
do with phagocytes gobbling up microbes, Metchnikoff—and
this is not unnatural—was filled with a proud joy. The greatest
of all microbe hunters really understood him, believed in
him.... Olga’s father had died, leaving them a modest income,
here in Paris his theory of phagocytes would have the
prestige of a great Institute back of it. “Is there a place for
me here?” he asked. “I wish only to work in one of your laboratories
in an honorary capacity,” begged Metchnikoff.

Pasteur knew how important it was to keep the plain people
thrilled about microbe hunting—it is the drama of science that
they can understand—so Pasteur said: “You may not only
come to work in our laboratory, but you shall have an entire
laboratory to yourself!” Metchnikoff went back to Odessa,
getting a dreadful snubbing from Koch on the way, and
wondered whether it would not be best to give up his tidy
salary at the Russian Institute, to get away from these people
yelling for results.... But he began to take up his work
again, when suddenly something happened that left no doubt
in his mind as to what he had better do.

In response to the farmer’s complaints of “Where are your
vaccines, our flocks are perishing from anthrax!” Metchnikoff
had told Dr. Gamaléia to start giving sheep the anthrax
vaccine on a large scale. Then, one bright morning, while
the Director was with Olga in their summer home, in the country,
a fearful telegram came to him from Gamaléia:

“MANY THOUSANDS OF SHEEP KILLED BY THE
ANTHRAX VACCINE.”

A few months later they were safely installed in the new
Pasteur Institute in Paris, and Olga (who enjoyed painting
and sculpture much better—but who would do anything for
her husband because he was a genius, and always kind to her)
this good wife, Olga, held his animals and washed his bottles
for Metchnikoff. From then on they marched, hand in hand,
over a road strewn with their picturesque mistakes, from one
triumph to always greater victories and notorieties.