VIII

Meanwhile he was scheming and groping about and having
dreams about other things that might cause the arteries to
harden, and suddenly he invented another cause—surely no
one can say he discovered it!—“auto-intoxication, poisoning
from the wild, putrefying bacilli in our large intestines—that
is surely a cause of the hardening of the arteries, that is what
helps us to grow old too soon!” he cried. He devised chemical
tests—what awful ones they were—that would show whether
the body was being poisoned from the intestine. “We would
live much longer,” he said, “if we had no large intestine, indeed,
two people are on record, who had their large intestine
cut out, and live perfectly well without it.” Strange to say,
he did not advocate cutting the bowels out of every one, but
he set about thinking up ways of making things there uncomfortable
for the “wild bacilli.”

His theory was a strange one, and caused laughter and jeers
and he began to get into trouble again. People wrote in, reminding
him that elephants had enormous large intestines but
lived to be a hundred in spite of them; that the human race, in
spite of its large intestine, was one of the longest-lived species
on earth. He engaged in vast obscene arguments about why
evolution has allowed animals to keep a large intestine—then
suddenly he hit on his great remedy for auto-intoxication.
There were villages in Bulgaria where people were alleged to
live to be more than a hundred. Metchnikoff didn’t go down
there to see—he believed it. These ancient people lived
principally upon sour milk, so went the story. “Ah! there’s
the explanation,” he muttered. He put the youngsters in his
laboratory to studying the microbe that made milk sour—and
in a little while the notorious Bulgarian bacillus made its bow
in the rank of patent medicines.

“This germ,” explained Metchnikoff, “by making the acid
of sour milk, will chase the wild poisonous bacilli out of the
intestine.” He began drinking huge draughts of sour milk
himself, and later, for years, he fed himself cultivations of the
Bulgarian bacillus. He wrote large books about his new theory
and a serious English journal acclaimed them to be the most
important scientific treatises since Darwin’s “Origin of
Species.” The Bulgarian bacillus became a rage, companies
were formed, and their directors grew rich off selling these
silly bacilli. Metchnikoff let them use his name (though Olga
insists he never made a franc from that) for the label.

For nearly twenty years Metchnikoff austerely lived to the
letter of his new theory. He neither drank alcoholic drinks
nor did he smoke. He permitted himself no debaucheries.
He was examined incessantly by the most renowned specialists
of the age. His rolls were sent to him in separate sterilized
paper bags so that they would be free from the wild, auto-intoxicating
bacilli. He constantly tested his various juices
and excretions. In those years he got down untold gallons of
sour milk and swallowed billions of the beneficent bacilli of
Bulgaria....

And he died at the age of seventy-one.