VI

It is amazing, when you remember that his brain was always
inventing stories about nature, how often these stories turned
out to be true when they were put to the test of experiment.
A German hunter had claimed: “There is nothing to Metchnikoff’s
theory of phagocytes. Everybody knows that you can
see microbes inside of phagocytes—they have undoubtedly
been gobbled up by the phagocytes. But these wandering
cells are not defenders, they are mere scavengers—they will
only swallow dead microbes!” The London Congress of 1891
was drawing near; Metchnikoff shouted for some guinea-pigs,
vaccinated them with some cholera-like bacilli that his old
friend, the unfortunate Gamaléia, had discovered. Then, a
week or so later, the big-bearded philosopher shot some of
these living, dangerous bacilli into the bellies of vaccinated
beasts. Every few minutes, during the next hours, he ran
slender glass tubes into their abdomens, sucked out a few
drops of the fluid there, and put it before the more or less
dirty lens of his microscope, to see whether the phagocytes of
the immune beasts were eating up Gamaléia’s bacilli. Presto!
These roundish crawling cells were crammed full of the microbes!

“Now I shall prove that these microbes inside the phagocytes
are still alive!” cried Metchnikoff. He killed the guinea-pig,
slashed it open, and sucked into another little glass tube
some of the grayish slime of wandering cells which had gathered
in the creature’s belly to make meals off the microbes. In a
little while—for they are very delicate when you try to keep
them alive outside the body—the phagocytes had died, burst
open, and the live bacilli they had swallowed galloped out of
them! Promptly, when Metchnikoff injected them, these microbes
that had been swallowed, murdered guinea-pigs who
were not immune.

By dozens of brilliant experiments of this kind, Metchnikoff
forced his opponents to admit that phagocytes, sometimes, can
eat vicious microbes. But the pitiful waste of this brainy
Metchnikoff’s life was that he was always doing experiments
to defend an idea, and not to find the hidden truths of nature.
His experiments were weird, they were often fantastically entertaining,
but they were so artificial—they were so far away
from the point of what it is that makes us immune. You
would think that his brain, which seemed to be able to hold
all knowledge, would have dreamed of subtle tests to find out
just how it is that one child can be exposed to consumption
and never get it, while some carefully and hygienically raised
young girl dies from consumption at twenty. There is the
riddle of immunity (and it is still completely a riddle!). “Oh!
it is doubtless due to the fact that her phagocytes are not working!”
Metchnikoff would have exclaimed, and then he might
rush off to flabbergast some opponent by proving that the
phagocytes of an alligator eat up typhoid fever bacilli—which
never bother alligators anyway.

The devotion of the workers in his laboratory was amazing.
They let him feed them virulent cholera bacilli (even one of
those pretty inspirational girls swallowed them!) to prove that
the blood has nothing to do with our immunity to cholera.
For years—he himself said that it was an insanity of his—he
was fond of toying with the lives of his researching slaves, and
the only thing that excused him was his perfect readiness to
risk death along with them. He swallowed more tubes of
cholera bacilli than any of them. In the midst of this
dangerous business, one of the assistants, Jupille, became violently
sick with real Asiatic cholera and Metchnikoff’s remorse
was immoderate. “I shall never survive the death of Jupille!”
he moaned, and Olga, that good wife, had to be on her guard
day and night to keep her famous husband from one of his
(always fruitless) attempts at suicide. At the end of these
strange experiments, Metchnikoff jabbed needles into the arms
of the survivors, drew blood from them, and triumphantly
found that this blood did not protect guinea-pigs from doses
of virulent cholera germs. How he hated the idea of blood
having any importance! “Human cholera gives us another
example,” he wrote, “of a malady whose cure cannot be explained
by the preventive properties of the blood.”

When some more than ordinarily independent student would
come whispering to him that he had discovered a remarkable
something about blood, Metchnikoff became magnificent like
Moses coming down off Mt. Sinai—searchers for mere truth
had a bad time in that laboratory, and you can imagine the
great dauntless champion of phagocytes ordering a dissenter
from his theory to be burned, and then weeping inconsolably
over him afterwards. But, just the same, Metchnikoff—so
great was the number of experiments made by an always
changing crowd of eager experimenters in his laboratory—this
Metchnikoff was partly responsible for the discovery of
some of the most astounding virtues of blood. For, in the
midst of his triumphs, Jules Bordet came to work with the
master. This Bordet was the son of the schoolmaster of the
village of Soignies in Belgium. He was timid, he seemed insignificant,
he had careless ways and watery-blue, absent-minded
eyes—eyes that saw things nobody else was looking for. Bordet
set to work there, and right in the shadow of the master’s
beard, while the walls shook with the slogan “Phagocytes!”—the
Belgian pried into the mystery of how blood kills
germs; he laid the foundation for those astounding delicate
tests which tell whether blood is human blood, in murder cases.
It was here too, that Bordet began the work which led, years
later, to the famous blood test for syphilis—the Wassermann
reaction. Metchnikoff was often annoyed with Bordet, but
he was proud of him too, and whenever Bordet found anything
in blood that was harmful to microbes, and might help to make
people immune to them, Metchnikoff consoled himself by inventing
more or less accurate experiments which showed that
these microbe-killing things came from the phagocytes, after
all. Bordet did not remain long in Metchnikoff’s laboratory....

Toward the end of the nineteenth century, when romantic
microbe hunting began to turn into a regular profession, recruited
from good steady law-abiding young doctors who were
not prophets or reckless searchers—in those days Metchnikoff’s
bitter trials with people who didn’t believe him began
to be less terrible. He received medals and prizes of money,
and even the Germans clapped their hands and were respectful
when he walked majestically into some congress. A thousand
searchers had spied phagocytes in the act of gobbling
harmful germs—and although that did not explain at all why
one man dies from an attack of pneumonia microbes, while
another breaks into a sweat and gets better—just the same
there is no doubt that pneumonia germs are sometimes eaten
and so got rid of by phagocytes. So Metchnikoff, after you
discount his amazing illogic, his intolerance, his bullheadedness,
really did discover a fact which may make life easier for
suffering mankind. Because, some day, a dreamer, an experimenting
genius like the absent-minded Bordet may come along—and
he may solve the riddle of why phagocytes sometimes
gobble germs and sometimes do not—he might even teach
phagocytes always to eat them....