IV

Then, in 1888, Dr. Salmon put Theobald Smith, with Kilborne
to help him, and Alexander to clean up after them—saying
nothing about ticks, Salmon put his entire staff to work
on Texas fever. “Discover the germ!” he told Smith. That
year they had nothing but the spleens and livers of four dead
Texas fever cows to investigate; packed in pails of ice, from
Virginia and Maryland to his furnace-like attic came those
livers and spleens. Theobald Smith had what so many of
those mystified scientists and baffled horse doctors lacked—horse
sense. He turned his microscope on to different bits of
the first sample of spleen; he spied microbes in it; there was
a veritable menagerie of different species of them.

Then Smith sniffed at that bit of spleen. He wrinkled up
his nose—it smelled. It was spoiled.

At once he sent out messages, asking the stockmen to get
the insides out of their cattle right away after they died, to
pack them quickly in ice, to see they got to the laboratory
more quickly. It was done, and in the next spleen he found no
microbes at all—but only a great quantity of mysteriously
broken up red corpuscles of the blood. “They look wrecked!”
he said. But he could find no microbes. He was still young,
and sarcastic, and impatient with any searcher who couldn’t
do close hard thinking. A man named Billings had claimed a
foolish common bacillus (which he found in every part of
every dead cow and in every corner of the barnyard—including
the manure pile—as well) was the cause of Texas fever.
Billings wrote a spread-eagle paper, saying: “The sun of
original research, in disease, seems to be rising in the West instead
of the East!”

“Somewhat pompous claims,” said Smith, and he blew away
all that pseudo-scientific rubbish in a few dry sentences. Smith
knew it was no good sitting in a laboratory, with no matter
how many guinea-pigs and what an array of fine syringes,
simply to peer at the spleens and livers of more or less odoriferous
cows. He was an experimenter; he must study the living
disease; be there while the cows kicked their last quivering
spasms; he must follow nature. He began to get ready for
the summer of 1889, when, one day, Kilborne told him of the
cattlemen’s ridiculous theory about the ticks.

In a moment he pricked up his mental ears. “The farmers,
the ones who lose the stock, who see most of Texas fever, they
think that?”

Now, though Theobald Smith was born in a city, he liked
the smell of hay just cut and the brown furrows of fresh-turned
fields. There was something sage—something as near
as you can come to truth for him in a farmer’s clipped sentences
about the crops or the weather. Smith was learned in the
marvelous shorthand of mathematics; men of the soil don’t
know that stuff. He was absolutely at home among the scopes
and tubes and charts of shining laboratories—in short, this
young searcher was full of sophisticated wisdom that laughs
at common sayings, that often jeers at peasant platitudes.
But in spite of all of his learning (and this was an arbitrary
strange thing about him!) Theobald Smith did not confuse
fine buildings and complicated apparatus with clear thinking—he
seemed always to be distrusting what he got out of books
or what he saw in tubes.... He felt the dumbest yokel to
be profoundly right when that fellow took his corn-cob pipe
from his maybe unbrushed teeth to growl that April showers
brought May flowers.

He listened to Kilborne’s gossip about that idiotic theory of
ticks; Kilborne told him the cattlemen of the West were
pretty well agreed it was ticks. Well, pondered Smith, those
fellows were surely innocent of any fancy reasoning to corrupt
their brains, they reeked of the smell of steers and heifers,
they were almost, you might say, a part of their animals; and
they were the ones who had to lay awake nights knowing this
dreadful disease was turning their cattle’s blood to water, to
taking the bread from their children’s mouths. They had to
bury those poor wasted beasts. And these experienced farmers
one and all said: “No ticks—no Texas fever!”

Theobald Smith would follow the farmers. He would watch
the disease as nearly as possible as those stockmen had watched
it. Here was a new kind of microbe hunting—following nature,
and changing her by just the smallest tricks.... The summer
of 1889 came, the days grew hot; the year before the cattlemen
had complained bitterly about their losses. It was
urgent to do something, even the government saw that. The
Department of Agriculture loosened up with a good appropriation,
and Dr. Salmon, the Director, directed that the work
begin—luckily he knew so little about experiments that his
direction never bothered Smith in the slightest.