II

In 1884 Theobald Smith was in his middle twenties; he was
a Bachelor of Philosophy of Cornell University; he was a doctor
of medicine from the Albany Medical College. But he
detested the idea of going through life solemnly diagnosing
sicknesses he could not hope to cure, offering sympathy where
help was needed, trying to heal patients for whom there was
no hope—in brief, medicine seemed to him to be a mixed-up,
illogical business. He was all for biting into the unknown in
places where there was a chance of swallowing it—a little of
it—without having mental indigestion. In short, though a physician,
he wanted to do science! In especial he was eager—as
what searcher was not in those piping days—about microbes.
At Cornell (it was before the days of jazz) he had
played psalms and Beethoven on the pipe organ; here too
(college activities had not yet engulfed mere learning) Theobald
Smith dug thoroughly into mathematics, into physical
science, into German, and particularly he became enthusiastic
about looking through microscopes. Maybe then he saw his
first microbe....

But when he came to the medical school at Albany, he found
no excitement about possibly dastardly bacilli among the doctors
of the faculty; germs had not yet been set up as targets
for the healing shots of the medical profession; there was no
course in bacteriology there—nor, for that matter, in any medical
school in America. But he wanted to do science! And,
caring nothing for the healthy drunkennesses and scientific
obscenities of the ordinary medical student, Theobald Smith
soothed himself with the microscopic study of the interiors of
cats. In his first published paper he made certain shrewd observations
on peculiar twists of anatomy in the depths of the
bellies of cats—that was his bow as a searcher.

He graduated and wanted above everything to be an experimenter,
but he had, before anything, to make a living. Just
then young American doctors were hurrying to Europe, eager
to look over Koch’s shoulder to learn ways to paint bacilli, to
breed them true, to shoot them under the skins of animals, and
to talk like real experts about them. Theobald Smith would
have liked to go but he had to find a job. And presently, while
those other well-off young Americans were getting in on the
ground floor of the new exciting science (afterward they told
how they had actually worked in the same room with those
great Germans!) and when they were getting ready to land important
professorships, Theobald Smith got his job. A humble
and surely not academically respectable job it was too! For
he was appointed one of the staff of the then feeble, struggling,
insignificant, financially rather ill-nourished, and in general
almost negligible Bureau of Animal Industry at Washington.
Counting Smith, there were four members of the staff
of this Bureau. The Chief was a good man named Salmon.
He was enthusiastically interested in what germs might do to
cows and sincerely passionate about the importance of bacilli
to pigs—but he knew nothing of how to find the microbes
harassing these valuable creatures. Then there was Mr. Kilborne
who rejoiced in the degree of Bachelor of Agriculture
and was something of a horse doctor (he now runs a hardware
store in New York, up-state). And finally, this staff to which
Smith came, was glorified by the ancient and redoubtable
Alexander, a darky ex-slave who sat about solemnly, and when
urged, got up to wash the dirty bottles or chaperon the guinea-pigs.

In a little room lighted by a dormer window under the roof
in the attic of a government building, Smith set out to hunt
microbes. It was his proper business! Naturally he went at
it, as if he had been born with a syringe in his hand and a
platinum wire in his mouth. Though a university graduate, he
read German well, and of nights, with gulps, he gobbled up the
brave doings of Robert Koch; like a young duck taking to
the water he began to imitate Koch’s subtle ways of nursing
and waylaying hideous bacilli and those strange spirilla who
swim about like living corkscrews.... “I owe everything to
Robert Koch!” he said, and thought of that far-off genius as
some country baseball slugger might think of Babe Ruth.

In his dingy attic he was tireless. It made no difference
that he was not strong—all day and part of the night he hunted
microbes. And he had musician’s fingers that helped him to
brew microbe soups with very few spillings. In off moments
he would swat the regiments of cockroaches who marched
without stopping into his attic from the lumber room close by.
In a remarkably short time he had taught himself everything
needful and began to make cautious discoveries—he invented
a queer new safe kind of vaccine, which contained no bacilli
but only their filtered formless protein stuff. The heat of his
attic was an intensification of the shimmering hell Washington
knows how to be, but he wiped the sweat from the end of his
nose and set to work in the right, classic way of Koch—with
an astounding instinct he avoided the cruder methods of Pasteur.