I

It was Theobald Smith who made mankind turn a corner.
He was the first, and remains the captain of American microbe
hunters. He poked his nose—following the reasoning
of some plain farmers—around a sharp turn and came upon
amazing things; and now this history tells what Smith saw
and what the trail-breakers who came after him found.

“It is in the power of man to make parasitic maladies disappear
from the face of the globe!” So promised Pasteur,
palsied but famous after his fight with the sicknesses of silkworms.
He promised that, you remember, with a kind of enthusiastic
vehemence, making folks think they might be rid
of plagues by a year after next at the latest. Men began to
hope and wait.... They cheered as Pasteur invented vaccines—marvelous
these were but not what you would call
microbe-exterminators. Then Koch came, to astound men
by his perilous science of finding the tubercle bacillus, and,
though Koch promised little, men remembered Pasteur’s
prophecy and waited for consumption to vanish.... Years
went by while Roux and Behring battled bloodily to scotch
the poison of diphtheria; mothers crooned hopeful songs into
the ears of their children.... Some men giggled, but secretly
hoped a little too, that the mighty (albeit windy)
Metchnikoff might teach his phagocytes to eat up every germ
in the world.... Diseases were getting a bit milder maybe—the
reason is still mysterious—but they seemed in no hurry to
vanish, and men had to keep on waiting....

Then arose a young man, Theobald Smith, at the opening
of the last ten years of the eighteen hundreds, to show why
northern cows get sick and die of Texas fever when they go
south, and to explain why southern cows, though healthy, go
north and trail along with them a mysterious death for
northern cattle. In 1893 Theobald Smith wrote his straight,
clear report of the answer to this riddle; there was certainly no
public horn-tooting about it and the report is now out of print—but
that report gave an idea to the swashbuckling David
Bruce; it gave hints to Patrick Manson; it set thoughts flickering
through the head of the brilliant but indignant Italian,
Grassi; that report gave confidence in his dangerous quest to
the American Walter Reed and that gang of officers and gallant
privates who refused extra pay for the job of being martyrs to
research.

What kind of man is this Theobald Smith (safe to say all
but a few thousand Americans have never even heard of him),
and how could his discoveries about a cow disease set such
dreams stirring—how could those farmers’ reasonings that he
proved, show microbe hunters a way to begin to realize the
poetic promise of Pasteur to men?