II

For the first thirty-five years of his life Ronald Ross tried
his best not to be a microbe hunter. He was born in the foothills
of the Himalayas in India, and knowing his father (if
you believe in eugenics) you might suspect that Ronald Ross
would do topsy-turvy things with his life. Father Ross was a
ferocious looking border-fighting English general with belligerent
side-whiskers, who was fond of battles but preferred to
paint landscapes. He shipped his son Ronald Ross back to
England before he was ten, and presently, before he was
twenty, Ronald was making a not too enthusiastic pass at
studying medicine, failing to pass his examinations because he
preferred composing music to the learning of Latin words and
the cultivation of the bedside manner. This was in the
eighteen-seventies, mind you, in the midst of the most spectacular
antics of Pasteur, but from the autobiography of
Ronald Ross, which is a strange mixture of cleverness and contradiction,
of frank abuse of himself and of high enthusiasm
for himself, you can only conclude that this revolution in medicine
left Ronald Ross cold.

But he was, for all that, something of a chaser of moonbeams,
because, finding that his symphonies didn’t turn out to
be anything like those of Mozart, he tried literature, in the
grand manner. He neglected to write prescriptions while he
nursed his natural bent for epic drama. But publishers didn’t
care for these masterpieces, and when Ross printed them at
his own expense, the public failed to get excited about them.
Father Ross became indignant at this dabbling and threatened
to stop his allowance, so Ronald (he had spunk) got a job as
a ship’s doctor on the Anchor Line between London and New
York. On this vessel he observed the emotions and frailties
of human nature in the steerage, wrote poetry on the futility
of life, and got up his back medical work. Finally he passed
the examination for the Indian Medical Service, found the heat
of India detestable, but was glad there was little medical practice
to attend to, because it left him time to compose now
totally forgotten epics and sagas and blood-and-thunder
romances. That was the beginning of the career of Ronald
Ross!

Not that there was no chance for him to hunt microbes in
India. Microbes? The very air was thick with them. The
water was a soup of them. All around him in Madras were
the stinking tanks breeding the Asiatic cholera; he saw men
die in thousands of the black plague; he heard their teeth rattle
with the ague of malaria, but he had no ears or eyes or nose
for all that—for now he forgot literature to become a mathematician.
He shut himself up inventing complicated equations.
He devised systems of the universe of a grandeur he thought
equal to Newton’s. He forgot about these to write another
novel. He took twenty-five-mile-a-day walking trips in spite of
the heat and then cursed India bitterly because it was so hot.
He was ordered off to Burma and to the Island of Moulmein,
and here he did remarkable surgical operations—“which cured
most of the cases”—though he had never presumed to be a
surgeon. He tried everything but impressed hardly anybody;
years passed, and, when the Indian Medical Service failed to
recognize his various abilities, Ronald Ross cried: “Why
work?”

He went back to England on his first furlough in 1888, and
there something happened to him, an event that is often an
antidote to cynicism and a regulator of confused multitudinous
ambitions. He met, he was smitten with, and presently he
married Miss Rosa Bloxam. Back in India—though he wrote
another novel called “Child of Ocean” and invented systems
of shorthand and devised phonetic spellings for the writing of
verse and was elected secretary of the Golf Club—he began
to fumble at his proper work. In short he began to turn a
microscope, with which he was no expert, on to the blood of
malarious Hindus. The bizarre, many-formed malaria microbe
had been discovered long ago in 1880 by a French army
surgeon, Laveran, and Ronald Ross, who was as original as he
was energetic and never did anything the way anybody else
did it, tried to find this malaria germ by methods of his
own.

Of course, he failed again. He bribed, begged, and wheedled
drops of blood out of the fingers of hundreds of aguey East
Indians. He peered. He found nothing. “Laveran is certainly
wrong! There is no germ of malaria!” said Ronald
Ross, and he wrote four papers trying to prove that malaria
was due to intestinal disturbances. That was his start in microbe
hunting!