I

The last ten years of the nineteenth century were as unfortunate
for ticks, bugs, and gnats as they were glorious for the
microbe hunters. Theobald Smith had started them off by
scotching the ticks that carried Texas fever; a little later and
six thousand miles away David Bruce, stumbling through the
African bush, got onto the trail of the tsetse fly, accused him,
convicted him. How melancholy and lean have been the
years, since then, for that murderous tick whose proper name
is Bo-ophilus bovis, and you may be sure that since those
searchings of David Bruce, the tsetses have had to bootleg for
the blood of black natives and white hunters, and missionaries.
And now alas for mosquitoes! Malaria must be wiped from
the earth. Malaria can be destroyed! Because, by the middle
of 1899, two wrangling and not too dignified microbe hunters
had proved that the mosquito—and only one particular kind
of mosquito—was the criminal in the malaria mystery.

Two men solved that puzzle. The one, Ronald Ross, was a
not particularly distinguished officer in the medical service of
India. The other, Battista Grassi, was a very distinguished
Italian authority on worms, white ants, and the doings of eels.
You cannot put one before the other in the order of their merit—Ross
would certainly have stopped short of solving the puzzle
without Grassi. And Grassi might (though I am not so
sure of that!) have muddled for years if the searchings of
Ross had not given him hints. So there is no doubt they
helped each other, but unhappily for the Dignity of Science,
before the huzzahs of the rescued populations had died away,
Battista Grassi and Ronald Ross were in each other’s hair on
the question of who did how much. It was deplorable. To
listen to these two, you would think each would rather this
noble discovery had remained buried, than have the other get
a mite of credit for it. Indeed, the only consolation to be
got from this scientific brawl—aside from the saving of human
lives—is the knowledge that microbe hunters are men like
the rest of us, and not stuffed shirts or sacred cows, as certain
historians would have us believe. They sat there, Battista
Grassi and Ronald Ross, indignant co-workers in a glorious
job, in the midst of their triumph, with figurative torn collars
and metaphorical scratched faces. Like two quarrelsome small
boys they sat there.