VIII

Such was the fight of Ronald Ross and Battista Grassi
against the assassins of the red blood corpuscles, the sappers of
vigorous life, the destroyer of men, the chief scourge of the
lands of the South—the microbe of malaria. There were aftermaths
of this fight, some of them too long to tell, and some too
painful. There were good aftermaths and bad ones. There
are fertile fields now, and healthy babies, in Italy and Africa
and India and America, where once the hum of the anopheles
brought thin blood and chattering teeth, brought desolate land
and death.

There is the Panama Canal....

Then there is Sir Ronald Ross, who was—as once he hoped
and dreamed—given enthusiastic banquets.

There is Ronald Ross who got the Nobel Prize of seven thousand
eight hundred and eighty pounds sterling for his discovery
of how the gray mosquito carries malaria to birds....

There is Battista Grassi who didn’t get the Nobel Prize, and
is now unknown, except in Italy, where they huzzahed for him
and made him a Senator (he never missed a meeting of that
Senate to within a year of his death).

All these are, for the most part, good, even if some of them
are slightly ironical aftermaths.

Then there is Ronald Ross, who had learned the hard game
of searching while he made his discovery about the gray mosquito—you
would say his best years of work were just beginning—there
is Ronald Ross, insinuating Grassi was a thief,
hinting that Grassi was a charlatan, saying Grassi had added almost
nothing to the proof that mosquitoes carry malaria to
men!

There was Grassi—justifiably purple with indignation, writing
violent papers in reply.... You cannot blame him! But
why will such searchers scuffle, when there are so many things
left to find? You would think—of course it would be so in a
novel—that they could have ignored each other, or could have
said: “The facts of science are greater than the little men who
find those facts!”—and then have gone on searching, and saving.

For the fight has only just begun. The day I finish this tale,
it is twenty-five years after the perfect experiment of Grassi,
comes this news item from Tokio—it is stuck away down in a
corner of an inside page of a newspaper:

“The population of the Ryukyu Islands, which lie between
Japan and Formosa, is rapidly dying off.... Malaria is
blamed principally. In eight villages of the Yaeyama group
... not a single baby has been born for the last thirty years.
In Nozoko village ... one sick old woman was the only inhabitant....”