VII

What is more, Battista Grassi was a practical man, and as I
have said, an excessively patriotic man. He wanted to see his
discovery do well by Italy, for he loved his Italy faithfully and
violently. His experiments were no sooner finished, the last
good strong nail was no sooner driven into the house of his
case against the anopheles, than he began telling people, and
writing in newspapers, and preaching—you might almost say
he went about, bellowing till he bored everybody:

“Keep away the zanzarone and in a few years Italy will be
free from malaria!”

He became a fanatic on the best ways to kill anopheles: he
was indignant (that man had no sense of humor!) because
townspeople insisted on strolling through their streets in the
dusk. “How can you be so foolish as to walk in the twilight?”
Grassi asked them. “That is the very time when the malaria
mosquito is waiting for you.”

He was the very type of the silly sanitarian. “Don’t go out
in the warm evenings,” he told every one, “unless you wear
heavy cotton gloves and veils!” (Imagine young Italians making
love in heavy cotton gloves and veils.) So there was a good
deal of sniggering at this professor who had become a violent
missionary against the zanzarone.

But Battista Grassi was a practical man! “One family, staying
free from the tortures of malaria—that would be worth ten
years of preaching—I’ll have to show them!” he muttered.
So, in 1900, after his grinding experiments of 1898 and ’99,
this tough man set out to “show them.” He went down into the
worst malaria region of Italy, along the railroad line that ran
through the plain of Capaccio. It was high summer. It was
deadly summer there, and every summer the poor wretches of
railroad workers, miserable farmers whose blood was gutted
by the malaria poison, would leave that plain, at the cost of
their jobs, at the cost of food, at the risk of starvation—to the
hills to flee the malaria. And every summer from the swamps
at twilight swarmed the malignant hosts of female zanzarone;
at each hot dusk they made their meals and did their murders,
and in the night, bellies full of blood, they sang back to their
marshes, to marry and lay eggs and hatch out thousands more
of their kind.

In the summer of 1900 Battista Grassi went to the plain of
Capaccio. The hot days were just beginning, the anopheles
were on the march. In the windows and on the doors of ten little
houses of station-masters and employees of the railroad
Grassi put up wire screens, so fine-meshed and so perfect that
the slickest and the slightest of the zanzarone could not slip
through them. Then Grassi, armed with authority from the
officials of the railroad, supplied with money by the Queen of
Italy, became a task-master, a Pharaoh with lashes. One hundred
and twelve souls—railroad men and their families—became
the experimental animals of Battista Grassi and had to
be careful to do as he told them. They had to stay indoors in
the beautiful but dangerous twilight. Careless of death—especially
unseen death—as all healthy human beings are careless,
these one hundred and twelve Italians had to take precautions,
to avoid the stabs of mosquitoes. Grassi had the
devil of a time with them. Grassi scolded them. Grassi kept
them inside those screens by giving them prizes of money.
Grassi set them an indignant example by coming down to Albanella,
most deadly place of all, and sleeping two nights a
week behind those screens.

All around those screen-protected station houses the zanzarone
swarmed in humming thousands—it was a frightful year
for mosquitoes. Into the un-screened neighboring station
houses (there were four hundred and fifteen wretches living in
those houses), the zanzarone swooped and sought their prey.
Almost to a man, woman, and child, those four hundred and
fifteen men, women and children fell sick with the malaria.

And of those one hundred and twelve prisoners behind the
screens at night? They were rained on during the day, they
breathed that air that for a thousand years the wisest men were
sure was the cause of malaria, they fell asleep at twilight, they
did all of the things the most eminent physicians had always
said it was dangerous to do, but in the dangerous evenings they
stayed behind screens—and only five of them got the malaria
during all that summer. Mild cases these were, too, maybe only
relapses from the year before, said Grassi.

“In the so-much-feared station of Albanella, from which for
years so many coffins had been carried, one could live as healthily
as in the healthiest spot in Italy!” cried Grassi.