VII

And in 1902, five years before that, Walter Reed, in the 
prime of his life, but tired, so tired, died—just as the applause
    of nations grew thunderous—of appendicitis. “I am leaving
    my wife and daughter so little....” said Walter Reed to his
    friend Kean, just before the ether cone went down over his
    face. “So little....” he mumbled as the ether let him down
    into his last dreams. But let us be proud of our nation, and
    proud of our Congress—for they voted Mrs. Emilie Laurence
    Reed, wife of the man who has saved the world no one knows
    what millions of dollars—let us say nothing of lives—they
    voted her a handsome pension, of fifteen hundred dollars a
    year! And the same for the widow of Lazear, and the same
    for the widow of James Carroll—and surely that was handsome
    for them, because, as one committee of senators quaintly said:
    “They can still help themselves.”

But what of Private Kissenger, of Ohio, who stood that test,
in the interest of science—and for humanity? He didn’t die
from yellow fever. And they prevailed upon him, at last, to
accept one hundred and fifteen dollars and a gold watch, which
was presented to him in the presence of the officers and men of
Columbia barracks. He didn’t die—but what was worse, as
the yellow fever germs went out of him, a paralysis crept into
him—now he sits, counting the hours on his gold watch. But
what luck! At the last account he had a good wife to support
him by taking in washing.

And what of the others? Time is too short to deal with those
others—and besides I do not know what has become of them.
So it is that this strange crew has made rendezvous, each one
with his special and particular fate—this strange crew who
put the capstone on that most marvelous ten years of the microbe
hunters, that crew who worked together so that now, in
1926, there is hardly enough of the poison of yellow fever left
in the world to put on the points of six pins....

So it is that the good death fighter, David Bruce, should eat
his words: “It is impossible, at present, to experiment with
human beings.”

FOOTNOTE:

[1] A spiral-shaped microbe has recently been brought forward as the
cause of yellow fever, but this discovery has not yet been confirmed.