IV

Then Reed came back to Cuba, and Carroll met him with enthusiasm,
and Walter Reed was sad for Lazear, but very happy
about those two successful cases of Carroll and X.Y.—and then,
and then (brushing aside tears for Lazear) even in that there
was the Hand of God, there was something for Science: “As
Dr. Lazear was bitten by a mosquito while present in the wards
of a yellow fever hospital,” wrote Walter Reed, “one must, at
least, admit the possibility of this insect’s contamination by a
previous bite of a yellow fever patient. This case of accidental
infection therefore cannot fail to be of interest....”

“Now it is my turn to take the bite!” said Walter Reed, but
he was fifty years old, and they persuaded him not to. “But
we must prove it!” he insisted, so gently, that, hearing his musical
voice and looking at his chin that did not stick out like the
chin of a he-man, you might think Walter Reed was wavering
(after all, here was one man dead out of three).

“But we must prove it,” said that soft voice, and Reed went
to General Leonard Wood, and told him the exciting events that
had happened. Who could be less of a mollycoddle than this
Wood? And he gave Walter Reed permission to go as far as
he liked. He gave him money to build a camp of seven tents
and two little houses—to say nothing of a flagpole—but what
was best of all Wood gave him money to buy men, who would
get handsomely paid for taking a sure one chance out of five of
never having a chance to spend that money! So Walter Reed
said: “Thank you, General,” and one mile from Quemados they
pitched seven tents and raised a flagpole, and flew an American
flag and called that place Camp Lazear (three cheers for
Lazear!), and you will see what glorious things occurred
there.

Now, nothing is more sure than this: that every man of the
great line of microbe hunters is different from every other man
of them, but every man Jack of them has one thing in common:
they are original. They were all original, excepting Walter
Reed—whom you cannot say would be shot for his originality,
seeing that this business of mosquitoes and various bugs and
ticks carrying diseases was very much in the air in those last ten
years of the nineteenth century. It was natural for a man to
think of that! But he was by all odds the most moral of the
great line of microbe hunters—aside from being a very thorough
clean-cut experimenter—and now that Walter Reed’s moral nature
told him: “You must kill men to save them!” he set out to
plan a series of air-tight tests—never was there a good man who
thought of more hellish and dastardly tests!

And he was exact. Every man about to be bit by a mosquito
must stay locked up for days and days and weeks, in that sunbaked
Camp Lazear—to keep him away from all danger of accidental
contact with yellow fever. There would be no catch
in these experiments! And then Walter Reed let it be known,
to the American soldiers in Cuba, that there was another war
on, a war for the saving of men—were there men who would
volunteer? Before the ink was dry on the announcements Private
Kissenger of Ohio stepped into his office, and with him
came John J. Moran, who wasn’t even a soldier—he was a
civilian clerk in the office of General Fitzhugh Lee. “You can
try it on us, sir!” they told him.

Walter Reed was a thoroughly conscientious man. “But,
men, do you realize the danger?” And he told them of the
headaches and the hiccups and the black vomit—and he told
them of fearful epidemics in which not a man had lived to
carry news or tell the horrors....

“We know,” said Private Kissenger and John J. Moran of
Ohio, “we volunteer solely for the cause of humanity and in the
interest of science.”

Then Walter Reed told them of the generosity of General
Wood. A handsome sum of money they would get—two hundred,
maybe three hundred dollars, if the silver-striped she-mosquitoes
did things to them that would give them one chance out
of five not to spend that money.

“The one condition on which we volunteer, sir,” said Private
Kissenger and civilian clerk John J. Moran of Ohio, “is that we
get no compensation for it.”

To the tip of his cap went the hand of Walter Reed (who was
a major): “Gentlemen, I salute you!” And that day Kissenger
and John J. Moran went into the preparatory quarantine, that
would make them first-class, unquestionable guinea-pigs, above
suspicion and beyond reproach. On the 5th of December Kissenger
furnished nice full meals for five mosquitoes—two of
them had bitten fatal cases fifteen days and nineteen days before.
Presto! Five days later he had the devil of a backache,
two days more and he was turning yellow—it was a perfect case,
and in his quarters Walter Reed thanked God, for Kissenger got
better! Then great days came to Reed and Carroll and Agramonte—for,
if they weren’t exactly overrun with young Americans
who were ready to throw away their lives in the interest
of science—and for humanity—still there were ignorant people,
just come to Cuba from Spain, who could very well use two
hundred dollars. There were five of these mercenary fellows—whom
I shall simply have to call “Spanish immigrants,” or I
could call them Man 1, 2, 3, and 4—just as microbe hunters
often mark animals: “Rabbit 1, 2, 3, and 4—” anyway they
were bitten, carefully, by mosquitoes who, when you take averages,
were much more dangerous than machine gun bullets.
They earned their two hundred dollars—for four out of five of
them had nice typical (doctors would look scientific and call
them beautiful) cases of yellow fever! It was a triumph! It
was sure! Not one of these men had been anywhere near yellow
fever—like so many mice they had been kept in their screened
tents at Quemados. If they hadn’t been ignorant immigrants—hardly
more intelligent than animals, you might say—they
might have been bored, because nothing had happened to them
excepting—the stabs of silver-striped she-mosquitoes....

“Rejoice with me, sweetheart,” Walter Reed wrote to his
wife, “as, aside from the antitoxin of diphtheria and Koch’s discovery
of the tubercle bacillus, it will be regarded as the most
important piece of work, scientifically, during the nineteenth
century....”

Walter Reed was so thorough that you can call him original,
as original as any of the microbe hunters of the great line—for
he was certainly original in his thoroughness. He might
have called it a day—you would swear he was tempted to call
it a day: eight men had got yellow fever from mosquito bites,
and only one—what amazing luck!—had died.

“But can yellow fever be carried in any other way?” asked
Reed.

Everybody believed that clothing and bedding and possessions
of yellow fever victims were deadly—millions of dollars
worth of clothing and bedding had been destroyed; the Surgeon-General
believed it; every eminent physician in America,
North, South and Central (excepting that old fool Finlay)
believed it. “But can it?” asked Reed, and while he was
being so joyfully successful with Kissenger and Spaniards 1, 2,
3, and 4, carpenters came, and built two ugly little houses in
Camp Lazear. House No. 1 was the nastier of these two little
houses. It was fourteen feet by twenty, it had two doors
cleverly arranged one back of the other so no mosquitoes could
get into it, it had two windows looking south—they were on
the same side as the door, so no draft could blow through
that little house. Then it was furnished with a nice stove, to
keep the temperature well above ninety, and there were tubs of
water in the house—to keep the air as chokey as the hold of a
ship in the tropics. So you see it was an uninhabitable little
house—under the best of conditions—but now, on the thirtieth
of November in 1900, sweating soldiers carried several
tightly nailed suspicious-looking boxes, that came from the
yellow fever wards of Las Animas—to make this house altogether
cursed....

That night, of the thirtieth of November, Walter Reed and
James Carroll were the witnesses of a miracle of bravery, for
into this House No. 1 walked a young American doctor named
Cooke, and two American soldiers, whose names—where are
their monuments?—were Folk and Jernegan.

Those three men opened the tightly nailed, suspicious-looking
boxes. They opened those boxes inside that house, in air
already too sticky for proper breathing.

Phew! There were cursings, there were holdings of noses.

But they went on opening those boxes, and out of them
Cooke and Folk and Jernegan took pillows, soiled with the
black vomit of men dead of yellow fever; out of them they
took sheets and blankets, dirty with the discharges of dying
men past helping themselves. They beat those pillows and
shook those sheets and blankets—“you must see the yellow
fever poison is well spread around that room!” Walter
Reed had told them. Then Cooke and Folk and Jernegan
made up their little army cots with those pillows and blankets
and sheets. They undressed. They lay down on those filthy
beds. They tried to sleep—in that room fouler than the dankest
of medieval dungeons.... And Walter Reed and James
Carroll guarded that little house, so tenderly, to see no mosquito
got into it, and Folk and Cooke and Jernegan had the
very best of food, you may be sure....

Night after night those three lay in that house, wondering
perhaps about the welfare of the souls of their predecessors in
those sheets and blankets. They lay there, wondering whether
anything else besides mosquitoes (though mosquitoes hadn’t
even been proved to carry it then!) carried yellow fever....
Then Walter Reed, who was a moral man and a thorough man,
and James Carroll, who was a grim man, came to make their
test a little more thorough. More boxes came to them from
Las Animas—and when Cooke and Jernegan and Folk unpacked
them, they had to rush out of their little house, it was
so dreadful.

But they went back in, and they went to sleep....

For twenty nights—where are their monuments?—these
three men stayed there, and then they were quarantined in a
nice airy tent, to wait for their attack of yellow fever. But
they gained weight. They felt fit as fiddles. They made vast
jokes about their dirty house and their perilous sheets and
blankets. They were happy as so many schoolboys when they
heard Kissenger and those Spaniards (1, 2, 3, and 4) had
really got the yellow jack after the mosquito bites. What a
marvelous proof, you will say, but what a dastardly experiment—but
for the insanely scientific Walter Reed that most
dastardly experiment was not marvelous enough! Three more
American boys went in there, and for twenty nights slept in
new unspeakable sheets and blankets—with this little refinement
of the experiment: they slept in the very pajamas in
which yellow fever victims had died. And then for twenty
more nights three other American lads went into House No. 1,
and slept that way—with this additional little refinement of
the experiment: they slept on pillows covered with towels
soaked with the blood of men whom the yellow jack had
killed.

But they all stayed fit as fiddles! Not a soul of these nine
men had so much as a touch of yellow fever! How wonderful
is science, thought Walter Reed. “So,” he wrote, “the bubble
of the belief that clothing can transmit yellow fever was
pricked by the first touch of human experimentation.” Walter
Reed was right. It is true, science is wonderful. But science
is cruel, microbe hunting can be heartless, and that relentless
devil that was the experimenter in Walter Reed kept asking:
“But is your experiment really sound?” None of those men
who slept in House No. 1 got yellow fever, that is true—but
how do you know they were susceptible to yellow fever?
Maybe they were naturally immune! Then Reed and Carroll,
who had already asked as much of Folk and Jernegan as any
captain has ever asked of any soldier—so it was that Reed and
Carroll now shot virulent yellow fever blood under the skin of
Jernegan, so it was they bit Folk with mosquitoes who had fed
on fatal cases of yellow fever. They both came down with
wracking pains and flushed faces and bloodshot eyes. They
both came through their Valley of the Shadow. “Thank God,”
murmured Reed—but especially Walter Reed thanked God he
had proved those two boys were not immune during those
twenty hot stinking nights in House No. 1.

For these deeds Warren Gladsden Jernegan and Levi E. Folk
were generously rewarded with a purse of three hundred dollars—which
in those days was a lot of money.