II

There was a bad state of affairs in San Cristobal de Habana
in Cuba in 1900. The yellow jack had killed thousands more
American soldiers than the bullets of the Spaniards had killed.
And it wasn’t like most diseases, which considerately pounce
upon poor dirty people—it had killed more than one-third of
the officers of General Leonard Wood’s staff, and staff officers—as
all soldiers know—are the cleanest of all officers and the
best protected. General Wood had thundered orders; Habana
had been scrubbed; happy dirty Cubans had been made into
unhappy clean Cubans—“No stone had been left unturned”—in
vain! There was more yellow fever in Habana than there
had been in twenty years!

Cablegrams from Habana to Washington and on June 25th
of 1900 Major Walter Reed came to Quemados in Cuba with
orders to “give special attention to questions relating to the
cause and prevention of yellow fever.” It was a big order.
Considering who the man Walter Reed was, it was altogether
too big an order. Pasteur had tried it! Of course, in certain
ways—though you would say they had nothing to do with
hunting microbes—Walter Reed had qualifications. He was
the best of soldiers; fourteen years and more he had served on
the western plains and mountains; he had been a brave angel
flying through blizzards to the bedsides of sick settlers—he had
shunned the dangers of beer and bottle-pool in the officers’
mess and resisted the seductions of alcoholic nights at draw
poker. He had a strong moral nature. He was gentle. But it
will take a genius to dig out this microbe of the yellow jack,
you say—and are geniuses gentle? Just the same, you will see
that this job needed particularly a strong moral nature, and
then, besides, since 1891 Walter Reed had been doing a bit of
microbe hunting. He had done some odd jobs of searching at
the very best medical school under the most eminent professor
of microbe hunting in America—and that professor had known
Robert Koch, intimately.

So Walter Reed came to Quemados, and as he went into the
yellow fever hospital there, more than enough young American
soldiers passed him, going out, on their backs, feet first....
There were going to be plenty of cases to work on all right—fatal
cases! Dr. James Carroll was with Walter Reed, and he
was not what you would call gentle, but you will see in a moment
what a soldier-searcher James Carroll was. And Reed
found Jesse Lazear waiting for him—Lazear was a European-trained
microbe hunter, aged thirty-four, with a wife and two
babies in the States, and with doom in his eyes. Finally there
was Aristides Agramonte (who was a Cuban)—it was to be his
job to cut up the dead bodies, and very well he did that job,
though he never became famous because he had had yellow
fever already and so ran no risks. These four were the Yellow
Fever Commission.

The first thing the Commission did was to fail to find any
microbe whatever in the first eighteen cases of yellow fever
that they probed into. There were many severe cases in those
eighteen; there were four of those eighteen cases who died;
there was not one of those eighteen cases that they didn’t claw
through from stem to gudgeon, so to speak, drawing blood,
making cultures, cutting up the dead ones, making endless
careful cultures—and not one bacillus did they find. All the
time—it was July and the very worst time for yellow fever—the
soldiers were coming out of the hospital of Las Animas feet
first. The Commission failed absolutely to find any cause, but
that failure put them on the right track. That is one of the
humors of microbe hunting—the way men make their finds!
Theobald Smith found out about those ticks because he had
faith in certain farmers; Ronald Ross found out the doings of
those gray mosquitoes because Patrick Manson told him to;
Grassi discovered the zanzarone carrying malaria because he
was patriotic. And now Walter Reed had failed in the very
first part—and anybody would say it was the most important
part—of his work. What to do? There was nothing to do.
And so Reed had time to hear the voice of that Theorizing Old
Fool, Dr. Carlos Finlay, of Habana, shouting: “Yellow fever
is caused by a mosquito!”

The Commission went to call on Dr. Finlay, and that old
gentleman—everybody had laughed at him, nobody had listened
to him—was very glad to explain his fool theory to the
Commission. He told them the ingenious but vague reasons
why he thought it was mosquitoes carried yellow fever; he
showed them records of those awful experiments, which would
convince nobody; he gave them some little black eggs shaped
like cigars and said: “Those are the eggs of the criminal!” And
Walter Reed took those eggs, and gave them to Lazear, who
had been in Italy and knew a thing or two about mosquitoes,
and Lazear put the eggs into a warm place to hatch into wigglers,
which presently wiggled themselves into extremely pretty
mosquitoes, with silver markings on their backs—markings
that looked like a lyre. Now Walter Reed had failed, but you
have to give him credit for being a sharp-eyed man with plenty
of common sense—and then too, as you will see, he was extraordinarily
lucky. While he was failing to find bacilli, even
in the dreadful cases, with bloodshot eyes and chests yellow as
gold, with hiccoughs and with those prophetic retchings—while
he was failing, Walter Reed noticed that the nurses who handled
those cases, were soiled by those cases, never got yellow
fever! They were non-immunes too, those nurses, but they
didn’t get yellow fever.

“If this disease were caused by bacillus, like cholera, or
plague, some of those nurses certainly should get it,” argued
Walter Reed to his Commission.

Then all kinds of strange tricks of yellow fever struck Walter
Reed. He watched cases of the disease pop up most weirdly
in Quemados. A man in a house in 102 Real Street came down
with it; then it jumped around the corner to 20 General Lee
Street, and from there it hopped across the road—and not one
of these families had anything to do with each other, hadn’t
seen each other, even!

“That smells like something carrying the disease through the
air to those houses,” said Reed. There were various other exceedingly
strange things about yellow fever—they had been
discovered by an American, Carter. A man came down with
yellow fever in a house. For two or three weeks nothing more
happened—the man might die, he might have got better and
gone away, but at the end of that two weeks, bang! a bunch of
other cases broke out in that house. “That two weeks makes
it look as if the virus were taking time to grow in some insect,”
said Reed, to his Commission who thought it was silly, but
they were soldiers.

“So we will try Finlay’s notion about mosquitoes,” said Walter
Reed, for all of the just mentioned reasons, but particularly
because there was nothing else for the Commission to do.

That was easy to say, but how to go on with it? Everybody
knew perfectly well that you cannot give yellow fever to any
animal—not even to a monkey or an ape. To make any kind
of experiment to prove mosquitoes carry yellow fever you must
have experimental animals, and that meant nothing more nor
less than human animals. But give human beings yellow fever!
In some epidemics—there were records of them!—eighty-five
men out of a hundred died of it, in some fifty out of every
hundred—almost never less than twenty out of every hundred.
It would be murder! But that is where the strong moral nature
of Walter Reed came to help him. Here was a blameless
man, a Christian man, and a man—though he was mild—who
was mad to help his fellow men. And if you could prove that
yellow fever was only carried by mosquitoes....

So, on one hot night after a day among dying men at Pinar
del Rio, he faced his Commission: “If the members of the Commission
take the risk first—if they let themselves be bitten by
mosquitoes that have fed on yellow fever cases, that will set
an example to American soldiers, and then—” Reed looked at
Lazear, and then at James Carroll.

“I am ready to take a bite,” said Jesse Lazear, who had a
wife and two small children.

“You can count on me, sir,” said James Carroll, whose total
assets were his searcher’s brain, and his miserable pay as an
assistant-surgeon in the army. (His liabilities were a wife and
five children.)