IV

So Paul Ehrlich, in 1902, set out on his hunt. He got out
his entire array of gleaming and glittering and shimmering
dyes. “Splen-did!” he cried as he squatted before cupboards
holding an astounding mosaic of sloppy bottles. He provided
himself with plenty of the healthiest mice. He got himself a
most earnest and diligent Japanese doctor, Shiga, to do the
patient job of watching those mice, of snipping a bit off the
ends of their tails to get a drop of blood to look for the trypanosomes,
of snipping another bit off the ends of the same tails to
get a drop of blood to inject into the next mouse—to do the
job, in short, that it takes the industry and patience of a
Japanese to do. The evil trypanosomes of the mal de Caderas
came in a doomed guinea-pig from the Pasteur Institute in
Paris; into the first mouse they went, and the hunt was on.

They tried nearly five hundred dyes! What a completely
unscientific hunter Paul Ehrlich was! It was like the first
boatman hunting for the right kind of wood from which to
make stout oars; it was like primitive blacksmiths clawing
among metals for the best stuff from which to forge swords. It
was, in short, the oldest of all the ways of man to get knowledge.
It was the method of Trial and Sweating! Ehrlich
tried; Shiga sweat. Their mice turned blue from this dye
and yellow from that one, but the beastly finned trypanosomes
of the mal de Caderas swarmed gayly in their veins, and killed
those mice, one hundred out of every hundred!

That man Ehrlich smoked more of his imported cigars, even
at night in bed he would awake to smoke them; he drank more
mineral water; he read in more books, and he threw books at
the head of poor Kadereit—who heaven knows could not be
blamed for not knowing what dye would kill trypanosomes. He
said Latin phrases; he propounded amazing theories of what
these dyes ought to do. Never had any searcher coined so
many utterly wrong theories. But then, in 1903, came a day
when one of these wrong explanations came to help him.

Ehrlich was testing the pretty-colored but complicated benzopurpurin
dyes on dying mice, but the mice were dying, with
sickening regularity, from the mal de Caderas. Paul Ehrlich
wrinkled his forehead—already it was like a corrugated iron
roof from the perplexities and failures of twenty years—and
he told Shiga:

“These dyes do not spread enough through the mouse’s
body! Maybe, my dear Shiga, if we change it a little—maybe,
let us say, if we added sulfo-groups to this dye, it would dissolve
better in the blood of the mouse!” Paul Ehrlich wrinkled
his brow.

Now, while Paul Ehrlich’s head was an encyclopedia of
chemical knowledge, his hands were not the hands of an expert
chemist. He hated complicated apparatus as much as he loved
complicated theories. He didn’t know how to manage apparatus.
He was only a chemical dabbler making endless fussy
little starts with test-tubes, dumping in first this and then that
to change the color of a dye, rushing out of his room to show
the first person he met the result, waving the test-tube at him,
shouting: “You understand? This is splen-did!” But as for
delicate syntheses, those subtle buildings-up and changings of
dyes, that was work for the master chemists. “But we must
change this dye a little—then it will work!” he cried. Now
Paul Ehrlich was a gay man and a most charming one, and presently
back from the dye factory near by came that benzopurpurin
color, with the sulfo-groups properly stuck onto it,
“changed a little.”

Under the skin of two white mice Shiga shot the evil trypanosomes
of the mal de Caderas. A day passes. Two days go by.
The eyes of those mice begin to stick shut with the mucilage of
doom, their hair stands up straight with their dread of destruction—one
day more and it will be all over with both of those
mice.... But wait! Under the skin of one of those two mice
Shiga sends a shot of that red dye—changed a little. Ehrlich
watches, paces, mutters, gesticulates, shoots his cuffs. In a few
minutes the ears of that mouse turn red, the whites of his nearly
shut eyes turn pinker than the pink of his albino pupils. That
day is a day of fate for Paul Ehrlich, it is the day the god of
chance is good, for, like snows before the sun of April, so those
fell trypanosomes melt out of the blood of that mouse!

Away they go, shot down by the magic bullet, till the last
one has perished. And the mouse? His eyes open. He snouts
in the shavings in the bottom of his cage and sniffs at the pitiful
little body of his dead companion, the untreated one.

He is the first one of all mice to fail to die from the attack of
the trypanosome.

Paul Ehrlich, by the grace of persistence, chance, God, and a
dye called “Trypan Red” (its real chemical name would stretch
across this page!) has saved him! How that encouraged this
already too courageous man! “I have a dye to cure a mouse—I
shall find one to save a million men,” so dreamed that confident
German Jew.

But not at once, alas and alas. With gruesome diligence
Shiga shot in that trypan red, and some mice got better but
others got worse. One, seeming to be cured, would frisk about
its cage, and then, after sixty days (!) would turn up seedy in
the morning. Snip! went an end off its tail, and the skillful
Shiga would call Paul Ehrlich to see its blood matted with a
writhing swarm of the fell trypanosomes of the mal de Caderas.
Terrible beasts are trypanosomes, sly, tough, as all despicable
microbes are tough. And among the tough lot of them there
are super-hardy ones. These beasts, when a Jew and a Japanese
come along to have at them with a bright-colored dye, lap
up that dye. They like it! Or they retreat discreetly to
some out-of-the-way place in a mouse’s carcass. There they
wait their time to multiply in swarms....

So, for his first little success, Paul Ehrlich paid with a
thousand disappointments. The trypanosome of David Bruce’s
nagana and the deadly trypanosome of human sleeping sickness
laughed at that trypan red! They absolutely refused to
be touched by it! Then, what worked so beautifully with
mice, failed completely when they came to try it on white
rats and guinea-pigs and dogs. It was a grinding work, to be
tackled only by such an impatient persistent man as Ehrlich,
for had he not saved one mouse?—What waste! He used
thousands of animals! I used to think, in the arrogance of
my faith in science: “What waste!” But no. Or call it waste
if you like, remembering that nature gets her most sublime results—so
often—by being lavishly wasteful. And then remember
that Paul Ehrlich had learned one lesson: change an apparently
useless dye, a little, and it turns from a merely pretty
color into something of a cure. That was enough to drive forward
this too confident man.

All the time the laboratory was growing. To the good people
of Frankfort Paul Ehrlich was a savant who understood all
mysteries, who probed all the riddles of nature, who forgot
everything. And how the people of Frankfort loved him for
being so forgetful! It was said that this Herr Professor Doktor
Ehrlich had to write himself postal cards several days ahead
to remind himself of festive events in his family. “What a human
being!” they said. “What a deep thinker!” said the cabbies
who drove him every morning to his Institute. “That
must be a genius!” said the grind-organ musicians whom he
tipped heavily once a week to play dance music in the garden
by the laboratory. “My best ideas come when I hear gay
music like that,” said Paul Ehrlich, who detested all highbrow
music and literature and art. “What a democratic man, seeing
how great he is!” said the good people of Frankfort, and they
named a street after him. Before he was old he was legendary!

Then the rich people worshiped him. A great stroke of luck
came in 1906. Mrs. Franziska Speyer, the widow of the rich
banker, Georg Speyer, gave him a great sum of money to
build the Georg Speyer House, to buy glassware and mice and
expert chemists, who could put together the most complicated
of his darling dyes with a twist of the wrist, who could make
even the crazy drugs that Ehrlich invented on paper. Without
this Mrs. Franziska Speyer, Paul Ehrlich might very well
never have molded those magic bullets, for that was a job—you
can watch what a job!—for a factory full of searchers.
Here in this new Speyer House Ehrlich lorded it over chemists
and microbe hunters like the president of a company that
turned out a thousand automobiles a day. But he was really
old-fashioned, and never pressed buttons. He was always popping
into one or another of the laboratories every conceivable
time of the day, scolding his slaves, patting them on the back,
telling them of howling blunders he himself had made, laughing
when he was told that his own assistants said he was crazy.
He was everywhere! But there was always one way of tracking
him down, for ever and again his voice could be heard,
bawling down the corridors:

“Ka-de-reit!... Ci-gars!” or “Ka-de-reit!... Min-er-al
wa-ter!”