II

Ehrlich was thirty-four years old then, and if he had died in
Egypt, he would certainly have been forgotten, or been spoken
of as a color-loving, gay, visionary failure. He had the energy
of a dynamo; he had believed you could treat sick people and
hunt microbes at the same time; he had been head physician in
a famous clinic in Berlin, but he was a very raw-nerved man
and was fidgety under the cries of sufferers past helping and
the deaths of patients who could not be cured. To cure them!
Not by guess or by the bedside manner or by the laying on of
hands or by waiting for Nature to do it—but how to cure
them! These thoughts made him a bad doctor, because doctors
should be sympathetic but not desperate about ills over
which they are powerless. Then, too, Paul Ehrlich was a disgusting
doctor because his brain was in the grip of dreams: he
looked at the bodies of his patients: he seemed to see through
their skins: his eyes became super-microscopes that saw the
quivering stuff of the cells of these bodies as nothing more
than complicated chemical formulas. Why of course! Living
human stuff was only a business of benzene rings and side-chains,
just like his dyes! So Paul Ehrlich (caring nothing for
the latest physiological theories) invented a weird old-fashioned
life-chemistry of his own; so Paul Ehrlich was anything
but a Great Healer; so he would have been a failure——But
he didn’t die!

“I will stain live animals!” he cried. “The chemistry of
animals is like the chemistry of my dyes—staining them while
they are still alive—that will tell me all about them!” So he
took his favorite dye, which was methylene blue, and shot a
little of it into the ear-vein of a rabbit. He watched the color
flow through the blood and body of the beast and mysteriously
pick out and paint the living endings of its nerves blue—but
no other part of it! How strange! He forgot all about his
fundamental science for a moment. “Maybe methylene blue
will kill pain then,” he muttered, and he straightway injected
this blue stuff into groaning patients, and maybe they were
eased a little, but there were difficulties, of a more or less entertaining
nature, which maybe frightened the patients—who
can blame them?

He failed to invent a good pain-killer, but from this strange
business of methylene blue pouncing on just one tissue out of
all the hundred different kinds of stuff that living things are
made of, Paul Ehrlich invented a fantastic idea which led him
at last to his magic bullet.

“Here is a dye,” he dreamed, “to stain only one tissue out
of all the tissues of an animal’s body—there must be one to hit
no tissue of men, but to stain and kill the microbes that attack
men.” For fifteen years and more he dreamed that, before
ever he had a chance to try it....

In 1890 Ehrlich came back from Egypt; he had not died
from tuberculosis; Robert Koch shot his terrible cure for consumption
into him, still he did not die from tuberculosis—and
presently he went to work in the Institute of Robert Koch in
Berlin, in those momentous days when Behring was massacring
guinea-pigs to save babies from diphtheria and the Japanese
Kitasato was doing miraculous things to mice with lockjaw.
Ehrlich was the life of that grave place! Koch would come
into his pupil’s crammed and topsy-turvy laboratory, that
gleamed and shimmered with rows of bottles of dyes Ehrlich
had no time to use—for you may be sure Koch was Tsar in
that house and thought Ehrlich’s dreams of magic bullets were
nonsense. Robert Koch would come in and say:

“Ja, my dear Ehrlich, what do your experiments tell us to-day?”

Then would come a geyser of excited explanations from
Paul Ehrlich, who was prying then into the way mice may become
immune to those poisons of the beans called the castor
and the jequirity:

“You see, I can measure exactly—it is always the same!—the
amount of poison to kill in forty-eight hours a mouse weighing
ten grams.... You know, I can now plot a curve of the
way the immunity of my mice increases—it is as exact as experiments
in the science of physics.... You understand, I
have found how it is this poison kills my mice; it clots his blood
corpuscles inside his arteries! That is the whole explanation
of it ...” and Paul Ehrlich waved test-tubes filled with brick-red
clotted clumps of mouse blood at his famous chief, proving
to him that the amount of poison to clot that blood was just
the amount that would kill the mouse that the blood came from.
Torrents of figures and experiment Paul Ehrlich poured over
Robert Koch——

“But wait a moment, my dear Ehrlich! I can’t follow you—please
explain more clearly!”

“Certainly, Herr Doktor! That I can do right off!” Never
for a moment does Ehrlich stop talking, but grabs a piece of
chalk, gets down on his knees, and scrawls huge diagrams of his
ideas over the laboratory floor—“Now, do you see, is that
clear?”

There was no dignity about Paul Ehrlich! Neither about his
attitudes, for he would draw pictures of his theories anywhere,
with no more sense of propriety than an annoying little boy,
on his cuffs and the bottoms of shoes, on his own shirt front
to the distress of his wife, and on the shirt fronts of his colleagues
if they did not dodge fast enough. Nor could you
properly say Paul Ehrlich was dignified about his thoughts, because,
twenty-four hours a day he was having the most outrageous
thoughts of why we are immune or how to measure
immunity or how a dye could be turned into a magic bullet.
He left a trail of fantastic pictures of those thoughts behind
him everywhere!

Just the same he was the most exact of men in his experiments.
He was the first to cry out against the messy ways of
microbe hunters, who searched for truth by pouring a little of
this into some of that, and in that laboratory of Robert Koch
he murdered fifty white mice where one was killed before, trying
to dig up simple laws, to be expressed in numbers, that he
felt lay beneath the enigmas of immunity and life and death.
And that exactness, though it did nothing to answer those
riddles, helped him at last to make the magic bullet.