III

Such was the gayety of Paul Ehrlich, and such his modesty—for
he was always making straight-faced jokes at his own
ridiculousness—that he easily won friends, and he was a crafty
man too and saw to it that certain of these friends were men in
high places. Presently, in 1896, he was director of a laboratory
of his own; it was called the Royal Prussian Institute for
Serum Testing. It was at Steglitz, near Berlin, and it had one
little room that had been a bakery and another little room that
had been a stable. “It is because we are not exact that we
fail!” cried Ehrlich, remembering the bubble of the vaccines
of Pasteur which had burst, and the balloon of the serums of
Behring which had been pricked. “There must be mathematical
laws to govern the doings of these poisons and vaccines and
antitoxins!” he insisted, so this man with the erratic imagination
walked up and down in those two dark rooms, smoking,
explaining, expostulating, and measuring as accurately as God
would let him with drops of poison broth and calibrated tubes
of healing serum.

But laws? He would make an experiment. It would turn
out beautifully. “You see! here is the reason of it!” he would
say, and draw a queer picture of what a toxin must look like
and what the chemistry of a body cell must look like, but as he
went on working, as regiments of guinea-pigs marched to their
doom, Paul Ehrlich found more exceptions to his simple
theories than agreements with them. That didn’t bother him,
for, such was his imagination, that he invented new little supporting
laws to take care of the exceptions, he drew stranger
and stranger pictures, until his famous “Side-Chain” theory of
immunity became a crazy puzzle, which could explain hardly
anything, which could predict nothing at all. To his dying day
Paul Ehrlich believed in his silly side-chain theory of immunity;
from all parts of the world critics knocked that theory to smithereens—but
he never gave it up; when he couldn’t find experiments
to destroy his critics he argued at them with enormous
hair-splittings like Duns Scotus and St. Thomas Aquinas.
When he was beaten in these arguments at medical congresses
it was his custom to curse—gayly—at his antagonist all the
way home. “You see, my dear colleague!” he would cry, “that
man is a SHAMELESS BADGER!” Every few minutes, at
the top of his voice he yelled this, defying the indignant conductor
to put him off the train.

So, in 1899, when he was forty-five, if he had died then,
Ehrlich would certainly still have been called a failure. His
efforts to find laws for serums had resulted in a collection of
fantastic pictures that nobody took very seriously, they certainly
had done nothing to turn feebly curative serums into
powerful ones—what to do? First, this to do, thought Ehrlich,
and he pulled his wires and cajoled his influential friends, and
presently the indispensable and estimable Mr. Kadereit, his
chief cook and bottle-washer, was dismounting that laboratory
at Steglitz—they were moving to Frankfort-on-the-Main, away
from the vast medical schools and scientific buzzings of Berlin.
What to do? Well, Frankfort was near those factories where
the master-chemists turned out their endless bouquets of pretty
colors—what could be more important for Paul Ehrlich? Then
there were rich Jews in Frankfort, and these rich Jews were
famous for their public spirit, and money—Geld, that was one
of his four big “G’s,” along with Geduld—patience, Geshick—cleverness
and Glück—luck, which Ehrlich always said were
needed to find the magic bullet. So Paul Ehrlich came to
Frankfort-on-the-Main, or rather, “WE came to Frankfort-on-the-Main,”
said the valuable Mr. Kadereit, who had the very
devil of a time moving all of those dyes and that litter of be-penciled
and dog-eared chemical journals.

Reading this history, you might think there was only one
good kind of microbe hunter: the kind of searcher who stood
on his own absolutely, who paid little attention to the work of
other microbe hunters, who read nature and not books. But
Paul Ehrlich was not that kind of man! He rarely observed
nature, unless it was the pet toad in his garden, whose activities
helped Ehrlich to prophesy the weather—it was Mr. Kadereit’s
first duty to bring plenty of flies to that toad.... No,
Paul Ehrlich got his ideas out of books.

He lived among scientific books and subscribed to every
chemical journal in every language he could read, and in several
he couldn’t read. Books littered his laboratory so that
when visitors came and Ehrlich said: “I beg you, be seated!”
there was no place for them to sit at all. Journals stuck out
of the pockets of his overcoat—when he remembered to wear
one—and the maid, bringing his coffee in the morning, fell over
ever-growing mountains of books in his bedroom. Books, with
the help of those expensive cigars, kept Paul Ehrlich poor.
Mice built nests in the vast piles of books on the old sofa in
his office. When he wasn’t painting the insides of his animals
and the outside of himself with his dyes, he was peering in
these books. And what was important inside of those books,
was in the brain of Paul Ehrlich, ripening, changing itself into
those outlandish ideas of his, waiting to be used. That was
where Paul Ehrlich got his ideas—you would never accuse him
of stealing the ideas of others!—and queer things happened to
those ideas of others when they stewed in Ehrlich’s brain.

So now, in 1901, at the beginning of his eight-year search
for the magic bullet he read of the researches of Alphonse
Laveran. Laveran was the man, you remember, who discovered
the malaria microbe, and very lately Laveran had taken
to fussing with trypanosomes. He had shot those finned devils,
which do evil things to the hind-quarters of horses and give
them a disease called the mal de Caderas, into mice. Laveran
had watched those trypanosomes kill those mice, one hundred
times out of one hundred. Then Laveran had injected arsenic
under the skins of some of those suffering mice. That had
helped them a little, and killed many of the trypanosomes that
gnawed at them, but not one of these mice ever got really better;
one hundred out of one hundred died and that was as far
as Alphonse Laveran ever got.

But reading this was enough to get Ehrlich started. “Ho!
here is an excellent microbe to work with! It is large and easy
to see. It is easy to grow in mice. It kills them with the most
beautiful regularity! It always kills mice! What could be a
better microbe than this trypanosome to use to try to find a
magic bullet to cure? Because, if I could find a dye that would
save, completely save, just one mouse!”