I

Two hundred and fifty years ago, Antony Leeuwenhoek,
who was a matter-of-fact man, looked through a magic eye,
saw microbes, and so began this history. He would certainly
have snorted a contemptuous Dutch sort of snort at anybody
who called his microscope a magic eye.

Now Paul Ehrlich—who brings this history to the happy
end necessary to all serious histories—was a gay man. He
smoked twenty-five cigars a day; he was fond of drinking a
seidel of beer (publicly) with his old laboratory servant and
many seidels of beer with German, English and American colleagues;
a modern man, there was still something medieval
about him for he said: “We must learn to shoot microbes with
magic bullets.” He was laughed at for saying that, and his
enemies cartooned him under the name “Doktor Phantasus.”

But he did make a magic bullet! Alchemist that he was,
he did something more outlandish than that, for he changed a
drug that is the favorite poison of murderers into a saver of
the lives of men. Out of arsenic he concocted a deliverer from
the scourge of that pale corkscrew microbe whose attack is the
reward of sin, whose bite is the cause of syphilis, the ill of the
loathsome name. Paul Ehrlich had a most weird and wrong-headed
and unscientific imagination: that helped him to make
microbe hunters turn another corner, though alas, there have
been few of them who have known what to do when they got
around that corner, which is why this history has to stop with
Paul Ehrlich.

Of course, it is sure as the sun following the dawn of to-morrow,
that the high deeds of the microbe hunters have not
come to an end; there will be others to fashion magic bullets.
And they will be waggish men and original, like Paul Ehrlich,
for it is not from a mere combination of incessant work and
magnificent laboratories that such marvelous cures are to be
got.... To-day? Well, to-day there are no microbe hunters
who look you solemnly in the eye and tell you that two plus
two makes five. Paul Ehrlich was that kind of a man. Born
in March of 1854 in Silesia in Germany, he went to the gymnasium
at Breslau, and his teacher of literature ordered him to
write an essay, subject: “Life is a Dream.”

“Life rests on normal oxidations,” wrote that bright young
Jew, Paul Ehrlich. “Dreams are an activity of the brain and
the activities of the brain are only oxidations ... dreams are
a sort of phosphorescence of the brain!”

He got a bad mark for such smartness, but then he was
always getting bad marks. Out of the gymnasium, he went to
a medical school, or rather, to three or four medical schools—Ehrlich
was that kind of a medical student. It was the opinion
of the distinguished medical faculties of Breslau and Strasbourg
and Freiburg and Leipsic that he was no ordinary student.
It was also their opinion he was an abominably bad
student, which meant that Paul Ehrlich refused to memorize
the ten thousand and fifty long words supposed to be needed
for the cure of sick patients. He was a revolutionist, he was
part of the revolt led by that chemist, Louis Pasteur, and the
country doctor, Robert Koch. His professors told Paul Ehrlich
to cut up dead bodies and learn the parts of dead bodies;
instead he cut up one part of a dead body into very thin slices
and set to work to paint these slices with an amazing variety
of pretty-colored aniline dyes, bought, borrowed, stolen from
under his demonstrator’s nose.

He hadn’t a notion of why he liked to do that—though there
is no doubt that to the end of his days this man’s chief joy
(aside from wild scientific discussions over the beer tables)
was in looking at brilliant colors, and making them.

“Ho, Paul Ehrlich—what are you doing there?” asked one
of his professors, Waldeyer.

“Ja, Herr Professor, I am trying with different dyes!”

He hated classical training, he called himself a modern,
but he had a fine knowledge of Latin, and with this Latin he
used to coin his battle cries. For he worked by means of battle
cries and slogans rather than logic. “Corpora non agunt nisi
fixata!” he would shout, pounding the table till the dishes
danced—“Bodies do not act unless fixed!” That phrase
heartened him through thirty years of failure. “You see! You
understand! You know!” he would say, waving his horn-rimmed
spectacles in your face, and if you took him seriously
you might think that Latin rigmarole (and not his searcher’s
brain) carried him to his final triumph. And in a way
there is no doubt it did!

Paul Ehrlich was ten years younger than Robert Koch; he
was in Cohnheim’s laboratory on that day of Koch’s first demonstration
of the anthrax microbe; he was atheistical, so he
needed some human god and that god was Robert Koch. Painting
a sick liver Ehrlich had seen the tubercle germ before ever
Koch laid eyes on it. Ignorant, lacking Koch’s clear intelligence,
he supposed those little colored rods were crystals. But
when he sat that evening in the room in Berlin in March, 1882,
and listened to Koch’s proof of the discovery of the cause of
consumption, he saw the light: “It was the most gripping experience
of my scientific life,” said Paul Ehrlich, long afterwards.
So he went to Koch. He must hunt microbes too! He
showed Robert Koch an ingenious way to stain that tubercle
microbe—that trick is used, hardly changed, to this day. He
would hunt microbes! And in the enthusiastic way he had he
proceeded to get consumption germs all over himself: so he
caught consumption and had to go to Egypt.